=== BEGIN BOOK ===
BOOK_ID: NIBLEY_CW_V10
TITLE: The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, Vol. 10 The Ancient State
FORMAT: TXT (normalized line endings; HTML entities unescaped)
NOTE: Use this file as the canonical source for retrieval/quoting.
=== END HEADER ===

The Ancient State

Hugh Nibley

© 1991 Hugh Nibley .

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission in writing

from the publisher, Deseret Book Company, P.O. Box 30178, Salt Lake City Utah 30178. This work is not an official publication of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The views expressed herein are the responsibility of the author and do not necessarily represent the position of the Church or of Deseret Book. Deseret Book is a registered trademark of Deseret Book Company.

Key to Abbreviations

HZ

Historische Zeitschrift

JAOS

Journal of the American Oriental

Society

JEA

Journal of Egyptian Archaeology

JQR

Jewish Quarterly Review

PG

J.-P. Migne, ed., Patrologiae

Cursus Completus . . . Series

Graeca (Paris: Migne, 1857-66),

161 vols.

PL

J.-P. Migne, ed., Patrologiae

Cursus Completus . . . Series

Latina/Rom (Paris: Migne, 1844-

64), 221 vols.

PO

François Nau and René Graffin,

eds., Patrologia Orientalis (Paris:

Librairie de Paris, Firmin-Di-dot,

1903- )

PT

Pyramid Text

RE

Pauly-Wissowa,

Realenzyklopädie der classischen

Altertumswissenschaft (Stuttgart:

Metzler, 1894-1972)

RHR

Revue de l’histoire des religions

Table of Contents

Foreword

The Arrow, the Hunter, and the State

Tenting, Toll, and Taxing

The Hierocentric State

Sparsiones

The Unsolved Loyalty Problem: Our Western

Heritage

Victoriosa Loquacitas: The Rise of Rhetoric

and the Decline of Everything Else

How to Have a Quiet Campus, Antique Style

New Light on Scaliger

Three Shrines: Mantic, Sophic, and

Sophistic

Paths That Stray: Some Notes on Sophic and

Mantic

Part 1: Introduction through Proposition 4

Part 2: Proposition 5 and Proposition 6

Part 3: Proposition 7 and Proposition 8

Part 4: Proposition 9 to Conclusion

Illustration Sources

Foreword

The essays in this volume represent a

very significant part of Hugh Nibley’s

scholarly corpus. Most of the papers were

previously published in academic journals,

including Classical Journal, Western

Political Quarterly, and Western Speech, from the early forties until the midsixties.

The only essays in this volume not

previously published are “The Sophic and

Mantic,” originally a series of lectures

delivered in 1963 at Yale University, and

“Paths That Stray,” drafted at about the same

time.

The topics of these essays range widely:

the role of various objects—the arrow and

the tent, for example—in archaic state

formation; the political ideology and religious and educational values of ancient

states; notes on Joseph Justus Scaliger, one

of the outstanding scholars of the seventeenth

—or any other—century. The theme—at root

deeply religious in nature—that pervades

most of these essays is the power and

pretensions of the ancient state. If the phrase

“The Greatest Show on Earth” had not

already been preempted and registered as a

trademark by Barnum and Bailey, it would

have served as an appropriate subtitle to this volume, since it focuses on a central insight

of these essays: however compelling and

attractive the educational values, the royal

ideology, and the symbols and artifacts of the state in antiquity (or in more recent times, for that matter), they represent, at root, a vast

fraud—an endless and shameless effort at

personal and national self-aggrandizement.

Statecraft, as it has generally been practiced,

is merely priestcraft in another guise.

There is a legitimate “kingdom,”

Professor Nibley would remind us, but it is

not one that seeks power in this world. As he

notes in “The Hierocentric State,” apostolic

Christianity “was keenly conscious of all the

imagery of hierocentric rule and ritual and,

above all, of the contrast of the two

kingdoms. The Apostles . . . tell us, it is true, that there is a universal throne—but it is not on this earth. The devil is the ‘Prince of this World,’ which is no place for the children of

the kingdom—they sojourn here as pilgrims

and as strangers. . . . Our heritage and

kingdom lie beyond: ‘here we have no

abiding kingdom.’ “At the center of this

divinely sanctioned kingdom, reflecting in its features a heavenly model, is the temple.

Like the hierocentric state, the temple (the

subject of several of Nibley’s essays

elsewhere in the Collected Works) is

“oriented about a point believed to be the exact center and pivot” of the cosmos.

Further, in many ancient states the tent is

inextricably connected with the temple. In a

dozen other ways, features of the ancient

state are like those of the temple. In one

crucial respect, however, they differ: the

former focuses on the kingdom of this world,

while the latter, though constructed on earth, demands loyalty to a kingdom “not of this

world.”

Nibley’s breathtaking erudition—

reminiscent of the polymathic tradition of

scholarship represented by “the great Joseph

Justus Scaliger,” as he is fond of calling him

—can be seen throughout this volume. By

turns, he treats the sparsio, a subtle though important feature of Roman religion

(reminding us that Dr. Nibley’s early

university training was in the Classics and

Ancient History); the arrow, a cultural

artifact found in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, as well as among ancient

Indo-European peoples and the Indians of

North America; and the impact of the rise of

rhetoric in the Greco-Roman world and in

the ancient Near East.

The essays in this volume reflect

Nibley’s deep and abiding interest in—may

we even say passion for?—the origins of

ideas and institutions. In his “Intellectual

Autobiography” in Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless (1978), Nibley writes that, finding English to be derivative, he “took to

Old English to find what was behind it; what

was behind it was Latin, and what was

behind that was Greek. In those days we

thought that you had reached the beginning of

everything with the Greeks” (p. xx). Soon,

however, he came to understand that “if you

really want to get back of reality, science is the thing; and, as Popper assures us, all

science is cosmology: I became a passionate amateur astronomer.” Then he discovered

that, while “everybody wanted to be a

scientist,” few paid attention to “the records of the race.” And so he abandoned the

laboratory for the stacks. We can be glad for

that decision, since this book—and the

others in the Collected Works—are its fruit.

Several of these essays reflect Nibley’s

quest for origins: he studies the arrow and

the tent as two primary artifacts in ancient

state formation; he examines the oldest

ideologies of the state (which reflect

conflicts that, as he states, “already exist[ed]

in the premortal sphere”); and he

investigates ancient values in learning and

education and their subsequent corruption by

the Sophists, who emphasized form over

substance and denied the prophetic,

providing a prologue to and explanation for

the educational—and spiritual—crisis of our

own age.

Despite the book’s title, these essays are

in fact often highly pertinent to our own time.

Astute readers will recognize in these essays

many now-familiar themes of Nibley’s

trenchant social commentaries. The foibles

of our age are nothing new, repeating what

has been done in other eras. For example,

“The Unsolved Loyalty Problem,” which

deals with loyalty and loyalty oaths in

antiquity, was originally written at the time

of the McCarthy hearings in the early 1950s

but raises soul-wrenching questions just as

relevant today as they ever were. “How to

Have a Quiet Campus, Antique Style,” was

composed on the occasion of a visit of a

former vice-president to the campus of

Brigham Young University, whom Nibley

calls “an authentic Rhetor—Greek, political,

ostentatious, and not overly scrupulous.”

This essay, as well as “Victoriosa

Loquacitas,” “The Sophic and Mantic,” and

“Paths That Stray,” speak to our own

educational and spiritual malaise as much as

to that in the ancient world. As I read

“Sparsiones,” where Nibley calls the

sparsio “the authentic heritage of the Golden Age, the sublime economy of which remains

throughout antiquity, and indeed in religious

ideology down to the very present,” I am

reminded of themes developed in some of

his essays on current social and religious

issues in Approaching Zion (volume 9 of the Collected Works), such as “Work We Must, But the Lunch Is Free.” The sparsio may be a manifestation, in a Greco-Roman context, of

the “lunch” offered by God that is out of all

proportion to man’s own effort and

contribution. All of this brings us back to the profound, implicit message of these essays:

wealth, learning (and its imitations),

technology, and assertions of divinely

bestowed authority give a false sense of security that are no substitute for the Gospel.

Some scholars write with the grace of

an elephant. It is one of Nibley’s virtues to

have a prose style that is both strong and

vigorous, while at the same time direct and

without affectation—something we would

expect, given his strong antipathy to the many seductions of rhetoric. Reading him is a

constant pleasure, even where the argument

is subtle or a page studded with details. To

benefit most fully from reading Nibley, one

must be like a cup, ready to be filled to the

brim, and then some. Reading some of these

essays may require some effort, but that

effort is invariably well rewarded.

We wish to express our thanks to those

who have contributed to the production of

this volume. Contributors include Glen

Cooper, James Fleugel, John Gee, Fran

Hafen, Andrew Hedges, Adam Lamoreaux,

Brent McNeely, Tyler Moulton, Phyllis Nibley, Art Pollard, Shirley Ricks, Mark

Simons, Morgan Tanner, James Tredway,

John Welch, and the staff at Deseret Book,

particularly Suzanne Brady, Shauna Gibby,

and Patricia J. Parkinson. Special thanks are

due to Michael Lyon, who provided the

illustrations for this volume.

Stephen D. Ricks

The Arrow, the Hunter, and

the State

In the study of ancient statecraft one is

constantly running across references to a

gadget that seems so minor and so

mechanical that its great importance is easily overlooked as a key to the nature and origin

of empire. It is the contention of this paper

that the marked arrow supplies decisive evidence for describing the process by

which hunters were able to impose a system

of government on the world. The marked

arrow not only supports the growing

suspicion that the peasant societies of the

great river valleys became conquering

empires by virtue of a discipline forced on

them from without, 1 but goes on to show how

such a transformation could take place.

Whereas only farmers possess the industry

and stability necessary to sustain a great

state, the marked arrow indicates that it was

nomad hunters of the steppe, with their

expansive and aggressive ways, who first

brought such a state into existence. Both

elements, expansion and stability, must be

combined if real empire—not a mere adding

of fields to fields on the one hand, or the

quick plunder of a continent on the other, but a program and technique of permanent,

universal rule—is to be achieved.

The present study undertakes to show

how, by using marked arrows in a peculiar

way, prehistoric hunters solved the problem

of exercising dominion over vast and

scattered areas and then applied the same

solution to the more difficult problem of

welding peasant and nomad cultures into

some sort of union, resulting in the great

centralized state of historic times. Three basic questions only will be treated: what

the marked arrow was, how it worked in

exercising its control over the closely knit

and widely ranging tribes of the steppes, and

how those tribes used it to coerce the

unwilling tillers of the soil to cooperate in

bringing forth the great state.

I.

Modern observers have described how

the native hunters of the northwestern coasts

of America secure their harpoons and

arrows by putting marks of identification on

them, thus guaranteeing both the return of the weapon to its owner and the right of the

latter to possess the game it has slain. 2 In this as in other things these people have

preserved the ways of that Magdalenian

hunting culture of which their own has long

been held to be the last direct survival. 3

From the same venerable source are

descended the marked arrows formerly

found all along the northern steppe of Asia

and among those Scandinavian bear—and

whale—hunters who in ancient as in modern

times placed their legally registered marks

on hunting arrows and harpoons (which they

also called “arrows”) to insure their return

to their owners and lawful possession of the

kill.4 This practice of marking arrows was once general among the American Indians5

and still survives among primitive hunters in

various parts of the world. 6 Indeed, nothing could be more natural than to put some mark

of identification on a highly prized object

designed to be risked in the gamble of the

hunt.

But the mark upon the hunter’s arrow is

more than a mere identification tag; it is a

high and holy object, sharing the “immortal

power” of the arrow itself. An arrow in flight is an awe-inspiring thing: once

released (so many a proverb proclaims) the

arrow is beyond human control and finds its

mark only by the workings of imponderable

fate. Throughout the world the arrow is a

prime instrument of divination and enjoys

first place in primitive games of chance;7 it is the spirit weapon that alone can prevail

against the demons or pass through the

absolute void between other worlds and our

own.8 The incredible range and accuracy of the primitive arrow that so astound the

civilized observer are proof to the savage

himself of the operation of a supernatural

power, as is evident in the prayers that the

legendary heroes of the steppe—Finnish,

Norse, Russian, Kazakh, Turkish, and Yakut

—address to their three enchanted arrows

before releasing them, 9 and, for instance, in the arrow-prayers of the Indian and the

Bedouin, 10 all eloquently expressing the humility of men about to entrust their lives

and their fate to a power beyond their

control.

The problem of the hunter is to enlist

this strange power in his own interest. This

requires recourse to the ingenious economy

of the hunting-fetish, that go-between without whose aid a man can neither prevail against

the game he chases nor enjoy lawful

possession of it once taken. 11 Among a variety of fetishes that achieves these ends,

the mark placed upon a shaft is particularly

useful, for not only does it establish legal

claim to the kill, but it is “the soul of the

arrow,” directing the missile to its prey and

endowing it with superhuman force.12 Both for identification and as hunting magic the

sign on an arrow is a preeminently practical

thing; it gets and it proves possession—a

point on which hunters are extremely

sensitive. Out of sight and beyond the hills, the smitten quarry is still the sacred property of him whose mark adorns the fatal arrow:

why shouldn’t such a useful claim to

ownership apply to other things as well? By

sticking his arrow in the ground beside any object, the Vedda claims that object as his

own. A natural transition carries the

authority of the marked arrow into a wider

economy of human affairs.

II.

Throughout the ancient world a ruler

was thought to command everything his

arrow could touch. Thus, whenever a ruler

of the North would summon all his subjects

to his presence, he would order an arrow,

usually called a “war-arrow” ( herör) to be

“cut up” and sent out among them. Upon

being touched by this arrow, every man had

immediately to “follow the arrow” ( fylgja

örum) to the royal presence or suffer banishment from the kingdom. 13 The arrow itself, in fact, was thought to pursue the

wretch who failed to heed the king’s

behest. 14 The “cutting” of the arrow was the placing of the royal mark upon it, giving it

the force of the king’s seal.15 As often as not the arrow took the form of a simple rod

( stefni), bearing marks of authorization while the message was delivered by word of

mouth, a technique recalling that of

Australian and some American primitives in

sending their message-sticks.16

The summons-arrow is common to the

whole northern steppe, where exceedingly

archaic forms of it are to be found and where

it has survived until recent times.17 Both as war-arrow and invitation stick (depending

on whether it is rejected or accepted) it

appears among the American Indians,

especially of the Northwest.18 But its most significant occurrence is found in altered but easily recognizable forms in the classical

civilizations of the Old World.

The herald of Zeus goes forth to

summon his subjects, armed with a golden

wand that subdues all creatures with its

touch. Hermes got this staff originally from

Apollo, who brought it with him as an arrow

from the land of the Hyperboreans,

somewhere in the northern steppe.19 Hermes’

specialty is rushing through the air by means

of his messenger-staff, the caduceus, which

is winged at one end like an arrow and

pointed at the other; holding to this the god is able to fly through space, to the upper and

lower worlds if need be, exactly as Abaris,

the Hyperborean shaman, flies over all the

earth as Apollo’s emissary when he grasps

the arrow that the god has given him as a

sign of his authority. 20 It is not necessary to

multiply parallels to show that in the earliest stratum of Greek legend we have a typical

summons-arrow, wending its way from the

far north to impose law and civilization on

the world in the name of Zeus. 21 The first message of Rome to Carthage was a

symbolic caduceus and javelin ( hastae

simulacrum) inviting the Carthaginians to submit or be subdued by force. 22

In Israel the Lord, calling upon a city to

declare its allegiance to him, sends his rod

to it, and a herald (a man of tūshiāh), seeing the name on the rod, calls out to the people:

“Hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it”

(Micah 6:9). That this rod was an arrow will

presently become apparent. 23

Figure 1. The marked arrows of the

four quarters, Zuñi Indians of New

Mexico, c. 1900. Usually the only

color used was a somber black

painted on the wooden shaft, but

sometimes the color of the

respective direction was used as

well. In more finished arrows, the tail feathers were notched and

tufted to correspond with the bands,

serving as mnemonic reminders of

the creation myths.

An impressive demonstration of the

authority of the summons-arrow is the early

and widespread rite of the four world-

arrows. The Olaf-Tryggvason Saga states a number of times24 that summons-arrows were sent “in the four directions.” For the

oldest and greatest festival of India, the

Aśvamedha, the king must send messengers

in the four directions to order “all who have

been conquered by his arrows” to appear

before him. The common use of the

summons-arrow in Aryan India makes the

meaning of the rite clear. 25 At the creation of the world, according to Zuñi doctrine, four

marked arrows, “the word-painted arrows of

destiny,” were carried “to the regions of men, four in number” (cf. fig. 1), an event

resembling a yearly ritual of the Kwakiutls

of the Northwest. 26 A variant of this is the shooting of arrows in the four directions, as

in the Ghost-dance of the Sioux, where four

sacred arrows were shot into the air towards

the cardinal points to symbolize the conquest

of the earth by the tribe. 27 A like practice is attributed in Jewish legend to the Emperor

Titus and to Nimrod who, from Jerusalem

and Babel respectively, shot arrows in the

four directions and claimed dominion over

all that lay within their range.28 The rite appears also in Indo-Iranian creation myths

and in the Sumerian story of Adad and the

Zu-bird. 29 In the Old World and the New it is also common to depict the swastika with its

four arms formed of marked arrows—plainly

the four world-arrows.

Related to the world-arrows is the

worldwide practice of making a sanctuary by marking off an area on the ground with the

point of an arrow, dividing it into four

sections by a cross with its arms to the

cardinal points. 30 The Germanic custom of claiming land by shooting a fiery arrow over

it31 may be related to the oldest measurement in India, which was the range of a throwing-stick, or “measurement by arrow-casts,”

later supplanted by measurement in

bowlengths. 32 The apportionment of land by the drawing of arrow-lots was common to

the Assyrians and the ancient Norse (whence

the expression “lot and scot”)33 and recalls the common medieval custom of transferring

the ownership of land baculi more, by the conveyance of a staff or arrow. 34 A marked arrow passed among the guests at a royal

banquet in the North announced the

transmission of a man’s estate to his heir. 35

The ancient and universal concept that God governs the universe and keeps order in

it by an arrow, the swift messenger of his

wrath that searches out and blasts any who

would challenge his authority, 36 can only have had its rise in a real summons-arrow,

for everywhere this heavenly arrow—the

thunderbolt—is held to take the tangible

actual form of a prehistoric stone-headed

arrow.37 It is the arrow of the summus deus, held on loan by an earthly king as a gauge of

divine support, that everywhere gives the

latter his earthly power and authority, 38 just as the marked arrow of the individual hunter,

as a fetish or grant of supernatural power,

gives him might and dominion far beyond his

own puny capacity. The dread offices of the

marked arrow were not reserved to kings

alone. Throughout the northern steppe it was

the custom to require all who came to the

king’s assembly to bring arrows with them

and to present them personally to the king.

From these arrows a census was taken, each

man submitting but a single shaft, which

represented him and bore his mark, for “both

in the Old World and the New, the arrow

came to stand as the token and symbol of a

man.” 39 To arrows thus used may be applied, for want of a better term, the name “census-arrow.”

The census-arrow is found among the

Scythians,40 Tartars, Persians, Georgians, Norsemen, and American Indians, 41 and it survived in recognizable form in India,

Egypt, and the Far East. 42 But like the summons-arrow, it is most frequently met in

altered but unmistakable form among nations

that had long given up the hunter’s way of

life.

One of the oldest Jewish-Christian

legends tells how all the men of Israel were

required to attend a great assembly, each bringing his staff, to be handed over to the

high priest and used in a lottery for the

distribution of brides.43 In the Qur’anic version of the same story, 44 it is not simply a staff, however, but an arrow that every man

must present, and this conforms not only with

the primitive Bedouin usage, but also with

the original Jewish custom. For in Israel it

was necessary for every man at a national

assembly to be represented by a “rod” with

his name on it (Numbers 17:2); every tribe

was a rod as well (Numbers 34:13-29), the

tribal rods being “each one inscribed with

the name of the tribe.” 45 Now the purpose of these rods, Gaster has pointed out, was to

determine allotments of brides, and the

allotment was performed by throwing rods

into the air and reading their message by the

manner of their fall; this, Gaster observes,46

is “tantamount” to the shooting of arrows. It

is in fact the commonest form of arrow divination, and seems to hark back to an

older dart, or throwing-stick, which is

commonly identified and interchangeable

with the arrow in archaic divination

practices. 47 Gaster’s interpretation is substantiated when one turns to the northern

steppe to find ancient Scythian, Turkish,

Finnish, Mongol, and Ossete tribes

regulating their land-and bride-lotteries by

the actual shooting of arrows that were

marked, like the rods of Israel, with the

contestants’ names. 48 Related practices are found throughout the North. Thus the winning

of Penelope has supplied Homer with a prize

nugget, which Finsler has traced back to the

northern steppe. 49

The use of all these marked arrows in

the making of legal decisions takes us right

into the heliastic courts of the Greeks, where every juror had to present a specially

colored wand ( baktēria) for admission, exchanging it for a symbolon, which he would exchange in turn for his day’s

subsistence. 50 Both the name and the use of the token identify it (as any lexicon will)

with the classical tesserae, or feasting tickets, and the first symbolon, or tessera hospitalis, on record was the arrow that Apollo gave to Abaris: the scholiast calls

this arrow a symbolon and says that it supplied Abaris with all the food and drink

he needed.51 Another link between the original arrow-token and the classical

tesserae is furnished by that common but enigmatic form of tessera described as a

“section of reed.” 52 For from time immemorial the Arabs had employed reed

arrow-shafts, devoid alike of feathers and

heads, but bearing some marks of individual

ownership, “to make division” at their tribal

feasts. 53 In the Pastor of Hermas,54 all who

come to the assembly of the Lord present sections of willow-reed for admission, each

receiving his proper place as designated by

certain cuts ( schismata) on his rod. Slips of wood were used also in the North to assign

places at banquets, but these first appear as

arrows, with the specification that “every

man’s arrows were marked. ”55 The red Indian who received an invitation-stick

(usually arrow-formed) was required to

keep it and bring it with him as a ticket to the feast.56

Why and how arrows, of all things,

came to be used as feasting tickets may be

best explained by an episode from the

Orvar-Odds Saga. 57 The text gives an authentic picture58 of a time when a great hunting culture flourished on the plains to the east of the Baltic. There is a tremendous

hunt, after which everyone returns to the

royal hirthstofa where each guest is

assigned his proper seat. All the game is then brought in and thrown in a heap before the

king (as in the Greek katabolia), who

personally examines all the arrows and, as

the marking of each is noted, has his herald

give public recognition to its owner for his

contribution to the banquet. The same

pleasant rite enlivened the feasts of the

heathen Bedouin: Jacob has pointed out the

survival of the arrow-lottery from those

tribal meals of the Arabs at which all the

meat was first thrown in a heap and then

distributed by portions to each man as his

arrow was drawn and his name called out. 59

Various hunting tribes of the Eastern and

Western hemispheres have the same

custom, 60 whereas the Greek and Roman tesserae follow the pattern: the tesserae were regarded as lots and distributed by lot,

each holder receiving the right to share in a

feast to which he was supposed to have

contributed some prize of the hunt. 61

Marked arrows could, like the Hebrew

rods, represent tribes as well as individuals

at the feasts. Each of the fifty-two Tartar

tribes in the time of Genghis Khan would

bring an arrow marked with its name to the

great assembly, where one man would be

chosen king of the whole nation by a double

lottery, first of tribal arrows and then of

shafts bearing the names of individuals

belonging to whichever tribe won the first

drawing.62 Bundles of fifty-two rods, bearing individual and tribal markings, also

represented the full membership of Indian

tribes in assembly: Culin says these rods

were once arrows. 63 Bundles of seven divination arrows standing for the combined

gentes of the Osage64 recall similar tribal bundles of the Scythians, Alans, Slavs, and

ancient Germans65 (who also chose their

leaders by drawing willow lots), and these have been compared in turn with the Persian

baresma66 and the Roman fasces (cf. fig. 2), a bundle of twelve rods (the rods of Israel

were likewise tied in a symbolic bundle of

twelve), 67 standing originally for twelve Etruscan tribes. 68 The cosmic numbers seven, twelve, and fifty-two have astral and

divinatory significance and suggest the

modern card deck, which Culin holds is

derived from “a quiver made up of the

different arrows of the individuals of a

tribe.” 69 This communal aspect of the marked arrow was always fundamental to its

nature, since arrow-marking was ever as

much a bid for public recognition as for

divine support.

Figure 2. The earliest surviving

fasces, c. 600 B.C., is this Etruscan

votive model of iron (A) showing

Eastern influence in its use of the

labrys, the double-axe of Crete.

This venerable symbol was later

adopted by the Romans, who

modified it by using their own

securis axe first as a sign of

sacrifice and then later of war and

capital punishment. On a coin of C.

Norbanus (B) 83 B.C., the consular

fasces is flanked by a wheat kernel

and the snaked-headed caduceus.

Our own dime of 1916 (C) was popular until the symbol was

tarnished by the Fascist movement.

Here the arrow shaft comes full

circuit, fulfilling its destiny as the

ultimate embodiment of power.

III.

The rise of the great state depended, as

Moret has recently pointed out, among other

things on the development of writing, by

which art alone a ruler can extend his word

of command indefinitely in time and space. 70

Such control at a distance was the very

function of the marked arrow, and Hilprecht

has given strong arguments for deriving the

earliest written documents, archaic cylinder

seals, from “the hollow shaft of an arrow,

marked with symbols and figures.” 71 If Hilprecht’s theory failed of general

acceptance, it was because no one could see how the arrow fitted into the picture. In view of the uses of the marked arrow by hunters,

however, that should be fairly clear,

especially if one considers a few related

facts that may be briefly listed.

1. The earliest gods of writing, Nebo,

Cadmus, Hermes, etc., were arrow gods.72

2. Some systems of writing of

mysterious origin, such as Ogam,73 Runic,74

and Himyaritic, first appear as arrow-

marking.

3. In the Far East, according to Culin,75

“the ancestry of the book may be traced to

the bundle of engraved or painted arrow-

derived slips used in divination” (cf. fig. 3).

4. The cylinder-seal and the arrow are

interchangeable not only as tokens but

actually as weapons (an utterly incongruous

equation in itself), the seal serving as an

arrow-missile, and the marked arrow serving as a seal. 76

5. The first writing, the first seals, and

the marked arrow all spring from the same

basic need: if, as Herzfeld maintains, the

idea of property that produced the seals and

writing is as old as humanity itself, 77 may we not look for a still older form of property-marking than the cylinder seal? And is not

such a form the marked arrow, which

everywhere precedes it and so strikingly

resembles it? That the cylinder seal

originated very probably somewhere in the

north of Asia supports the suspicion. 78

Whatever its origin, the writing of

documents was conceived for the same end

as the marking of arrows, and the two meet

on common ground in the archaic cylinder

seal; seal and arrow grew up together,

having performed identical functions from

the first as instruments of identification and authority.

Equipped with such an effective tool,

the men of the steppes enjoyed a powerful

advantage over the settled agrarians who did

not have, because they did not need, anything

like it. Against them it was devastating and

achieved a permanent conquest; it was an

utterly cynical form of persuasion to which

they had no answer.

Figure 3. From the famous Han dynasty tombs at Ma Wang Tui,

174-145 B.C., come these examples

of a bamboo “book” (B) listing a

tomb inventory as well as a bundle

of notched peach wood sticks (A).

An archaic custom even then, each

stick represented the individual

servant who accompanied his

mistress into the next life. Today,

patients wishing to divine the god

of medicine’s prescription consult

the tsien tung (C) by shaking the

quiver-shaped bamboo container

until one of the inscribed sticks

“jumps” out.

The peasants of the Old World tell a

remarkably uniform tale of a mad hunter

from the North and East who claimed to rule

the world in the insane conviction that he had

conquered God with his arrow. Such a one was the archaic and mysterious Nimrod, the

mighty hunter of the steppes, who shot an

arrow into the sky (standard shaman

practice)79 and when a shower of blood ensued believed that he had conquered God

and won for himself the universal kingship. 80

The story is based on a genuine hunting ritual of great antiquity, 81 but the literary records all chill with horror at the thought of the man who first turned his arrows from the hunting

of beasts to become “a hunter of men,” who

founded the first great state, invented

organized warfare, and “made all people

rebellious against God.” 82 He it was who challenged God to a shooting-match with the

blasphemous boast, “It is I who kill, and I

who let live!” 83 In reply to which his followers were turned to stone by God’s

arrows, while their leader was driven mad

in the same peculiar manner (by a fly in the

brain) as that Roman Emperor who would destroy God’s temple and who shot his

arrow in the four directions from Jerusalem,

claiming dominion over the whole world. 84

A hundred names might be substituted

for that of Nimrod. Japheth, the common

ancestor of the people of the northern steppe

(Genesis 10:2-5), as Japetus, challenged the

rule of Zeus and was smitten by the

thunderbolt, even as was his son Prometheus,

and for that matter all the other giants. It

needs only little research to learn that the

crime and the punishment of Nimrod was

repeated in the case of Aesculapius, his

father Apollo (the Admetus story), the

Hyperborean Orion, Sisyphus, Salmoneus,

the Emperor Julian (who was smitten by St.

Mercurius, the arrow of God), Romulus

Silvius, Otos and Ephialtes, Nebuchadnezzar

(as legendary son of Nimrod), Lepreus,

Bootes, the Cyclopes, Gog and Magog, Esau,

Goliath and his brother, who had an archery contest with David,85 Eurotos, Philoctetes, Herakles, and even Odysseus. 86 The Cannibal Hymn from pre-Dynastic Egypt

describes the deceased Pharaoh as a Mad

Hunter who seizes the government of the

universe and throws all things into disorder,

just as the equally ancient Vulture Stele

describes the great god Ningirsu as “a beast

of prey from the steppe,” even while

praising him as the author and ruler of all. 87

Folklorists have long identified these

terrible hunters of the East with the

ubiquitous wild huntsman, a great lord or

lady who will do nothing but hunt, who holds

his agrarian hinds in utter contempt, and

publicly announces that he prefers hunting to

heaven. Invariably this monster is in the eyes of the peasantry under a terrible curse, and

he usually ends up by being turned to stone

when God’s bolt overtakes him.88 Yet his is

the rightful rule: “In the rural life of Europe,”

write Peake and Fleure, “the waste and

hunting rights down to our time have

typically belonged to the ‘lords’ in a very

special and intimate way,” and they argue

that this equation of hunting and ruling is the result of prehistoric invasions of Europe by

hunting nomads from the Russo-Turkestan

steppe. 89 Such a conquest is not a unique event in history, however, but a

characteristic one, as when in the eleventh

century Saxon farmers found themselves

saddled with the outrageous hunting laws of

an invading Norse aristocracy. 90 It is the monotonous theme of Asiatic history right

into the nineteenth century, when Khazakh,

Kalmuk, and Jungar nomads moved in from

the east to subject and “govern” the peasants

exactly as they were oppressed and

controlled by the Scythians in the days of

Strabo. 91

The tradition of the Mad Hunter presents the uniform picture of peasant

societies enduring the overlordship of nomad

intruders from the perennial reservoirs of

central Asia, whose way of life was utterly

abhorrent to them, and to whom their own

was quite incomprehensible. 92

IV.

But may the human race be so neatly

divided into men of the steppe and men

tilling the soil? It may indeed, and it is the arrow that does the dividing. Since the bow

can be used effectively only by experts, its

general employment ceases whenever

hunting is given up as a way of life, only to

be resumed in periods of migration.93

Archery is thus either all-important or

negligible in a culture, and the ancient world is divided sharply into two camps, those

who use the bow and those who do not. 94

The division is of course geographical:

when encroaching forests drove the big game

out of Europe at the end of the Paleolithic,

the hunters followed their quarry, to preserve on the steppes of Asia a way of life largely

förgötten in their former homelands. 95 The resulting cultural dichotomy is a basic fact of history, since civilization as history knows it is the rather calamitous result of bringing

these two forms together. Here the marked

arrow seems to have played a major role.

The civilized people of antiquity had a

common tradition that the summus deus at the beginning of everything won dominion of

the universe by smiting a dark adversary

with an arrow. 96 As has been seen, God rules the universe by an arrow, and the

classic emblems of authority—scepter,

wand, spear, trident, double axe, crozier,

lotus-staff, fleur-de-lis, and so forth—may

be traced back rather easily to a common identity with the prehistoric thunderbolt,

taking the tangible form of a stone-headed

arrow.97 Throughout the vast reaches of Asia, men were, to use Pliny’s expression,

“under subjection to the reed.” From the

Chinese war-lord in the East to Saladin in

the West, the arrow—a real arrow and a

marked one—is the ultimate symbol of

authority, the banner itself being originally

but a message-strip tied to an arrow. 98

With that arrow go those techniques of

empire which no farmers could have

invented: even Rome borrowed her theory

and practice of empire whole-cloth from the

East, where, so far as we know, the first man

to achieve actual rule of the civilized world

was no Egyptian or Babylonian (though they

all dreamed of being Cosmocrator) but

Khian, a nomad Hyksos from the steppes. 99

Symbols of rule and ownership at a lower level were those armorial bearings of

the Middle Ages which, whether copied

from the tribal insignia of the East100 or adapted from the earlier house-marks and

landmarks of the West, 101 were originally the arrow-marks of hunters.102 The aristocracy were hunters, whose arrogant and

blasphemous mottoes (usually proclaiming

the bearer’s power to maim if offended) and

whose weird and unearthly disguises were

designed to inspire paralyzing dread in the

simple rustics who by the mere suspicion of

presuming to hunt on their own would incur

penalties worse than death. Whenever the

noble strain was threatened with extinction,

it could always count on eager volunteers

from the ranks of the bourgeoisie to

replenish the blood and maintain the hunting

tradition: add to Froissart’s testimony the

English glue-manufacturer in his vast, dark

“lodge,” or the Russian baron, or the German industrialist of the nineteenth century

diligently cultivating the hunter’s way of life in the midst of purely agrarian societies of

great antiquity.

The ways of the hunting nobility with all

their social and political implications have

been traced back to the great hunting parks of Asiatic monarchs.103 These “paradises”

prove beyond any doubt that kings must be

hunters. The ancients, East and West,

visualized power, glory, and dominion as

embodied in the person of the Cosmocrator,

earthly counterpart of the creator, enthroned

in the midst of a vast assembly of birds and

animals as well as of men and jinns. The

picture of the great king being acclaimed in a single mighty chorus by all living things

assembled before his throne meets us full-

blown in Sumerian creation hymns; it is

reflected in accounts of Adam, Yima,

Orpheus, Ninurta, and others as Lord of the Animals and King of the Golden Age; it is a

favorite device of the Hellenistic orator and

the darling theme of Jewish and Arabic

commentators, whose Solomon sits in the

midst of the demons and animals as ruler of

the world; it produced the Physiologus and

the Bestiaries and provides the setting of

Reynard the Fox and many a scene in Kalila and Dimna, Babrius, and Aesop, and it begot the Medieval Parliament of Birds,

which is not so far from Aristophanes. And

wherever we are treated to this wonderful

spectacle of the world-king and the assembly

of the animals, whether in song, drama,

fable, or sermon, it is made to serve as a

commentary on government. 104

But the grandiose concept of the

universal ruler gathering all the birds and

animals in his presence (the theme of the

Reynard and hoopoe stories is that one

creature alone fails to answer the summons) is no mere flight of fancy nor invention of

allegory. Eyewitness accounts of the vast

ordered animal parks of the Great Khan, the

Mongol emperors at Peking, and the kings of

Persia, Assyria, and Babylonia leave no

doubt that the staggering project was actually carried out as an adjunct of universal rule. 105

The thing was adopted by the Hellenistic

rulers along with their claims to divine

authority and copied from them (or taken

over directly from Baghdad) by the

Byzantine emperors, who transmitted it in

turn to the kings of Europe—throne and court

everywhere follow the same pattern, which

is that of Solomon enthroned in the midst of

men and animals. 106

The royal parks of central Asia (the

Chinese call the park the Paradise of the

West, and the Babylonians placed it in the

North, cf. Isaiah 14:13-14) were no

invention of royal vanity, for the system of reserving certain areas in which animals are

sacrosanct (called by the Arabs jiwār) is a perfectly practical one. The actual assembly

of the animals recalls the great tribal hunts or animal-drives of the past: al-Bīrūnī has

described such a drive taking place in the

immense royal park at Baghdad in the tenth

century: it was ritual, of course, but when

was the hunt not a ritual? 107 It should be remembered that ritual animal-drives, like

the great dances of the Indians of the

Southwest, are aimed at increasing and

protecting the game as well as exploiting it.

But when game is thus protected, and

when it is herds of ungulates that one is

driving in the hunt, how close is hunting to

herding! Jacob speaks of the tame gazelles

that regularly turn up in the jiwār whenever animals and men meet on a peace footing.

Nevertheless, hunting and not herding is the

original motif, though the distinction between them is sometimes very fine.

V.

Though the arrow rules the world, its

victory is not final. For over against its

claims must be set the equally valid and

venerable claims of the Black-Earth, the

Mother of Gods and Men, inculcating the

deep conviction that a man can possess only

the earth he “quickens,” all other ownership

coming under the head of fraud. To those

who work the soil, the holding of more land

than one can exploit is wasteful and

meaningless, an offense to God and an

affront to Justice herself. 108 The hunter’s arrow, on the other hand, marked with his

noble “crest,” gives him, within the limits of a preserve necessarily much vaster than that

of any farmer, the divine right to possess and

dominate whatever it can reach. And so the issue is drawn: to those who held broad

lands, baculi more, the arrow was the high and holy symbol of possession; to those who

cultivated those lands it was “looked upon . .

. as the appropriate missile of the robber, or of one who lurked in ambush.” 109 The antithesis is complete: there is no

understanding between Abraham and Nimrod

because each is sure the other is mad.

At present a man’s signature performs

the offices formerly consigned to his seal

and for which but a few generations back the

actual possession of a staff or tally-stick was indispensable.110 Thus man has taken another step away from the arrow, but that is only

incidental: even the most primitive

alteration, the removal of head and

feathering, changed the form of the thing

almost beyond recognition. It is the function

that remains intact. A mere mark or symbol

still bestows proprietary right, operating through unlimited time and space, over

anything on earth. This is no mere refinement

of lawyer’s wit, nor is it a universal human

concept: it is rather, as its lineage shows, the hunter’s peculiar idea of property and right.

Since the marked arrow has long since

become an antiquarian oddity, it would be

wrong to claim that it still divides the world into two camps as of old. Nevertheless there

is no other teacher that can show so well

how our world came to be a perennially

divided one. The marked arrow

demonstrates what without it would be a

mere surmise: that civilization is the issue of a forced union between two fundamentally

hostile ways of life, a union which however

productive of history has never been a happy

one.

Notes

This article was originally published in Western Political Quarterly 2/3 (1949): 328-44.

Footnotes

^1. Moritz Hoernes, Natur-und Urgeschichte des Menschen, 2 vols. (Vienna: Hastlben, 1909), 2:392-96; Thorkild Jacobsen, “Primitive

Democracy in Ancient Mesopotamia,”

Journal of Near Eastern Studies 2 (1943): 159-72; Carl H. Bishop, “The Beginnings of

Civilization in Eastern Asia,” Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution (1940): 431, 433-45.

^2. Robert F. Heizer, “Aconite Poison Whaling in Asia and America: An Aleutian Transfer to

the New World,” Bureau of American

Ethnology Bulletin 24 (1943): 421, 429-36, 440, 446; Aleš Hrdlička, The Aleutian and

Commander Islands (Philadelphia: Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, 1945),

130, 132; Theodor W. Danzel, Die Anfänge

der Schrift (Leipzig: Vorgtländer, 1912), 38.

^3. The history of the problem is given by Walter J. Hoffman, “The Graphic Art of the

Eskimos,” Annual Report of the U.S.

National Museum (1895): 763-65, 934-38; see F. M. Bergounioux and André Glory, Les premiers hommes (Paris: Didier, 1945), 232-39.

^4. Hjalmar S. Falk, Altnordische Waffenkunde (Kristiania: Dybwad, 1914), 101.

^5. Walter J. Hoffman, “The Menomini Indians,”

Annual Report of the Bureau of American

Ethnology 14 (1892-1893): 278; J. Owen Dorsey, “Omaha Dwellings, Furniture, and

Implements,” Annual Report of the Bureau

of American Ethnology 13 (1891-1892):

287; William Bray, “Observations on the

Indian Method of Picture-Writing,”

Archaeologia 6 (1782): 160; Hermann

Meyer, “Bows and Arrows in Central

Brazil,” Annual Report of the Smithsonian

Institution (1896): 553, 561, 568, 571, 576-82; Fritz Krause, In den Wildnissen

Brasiliens (Leipzig: Doigländer, 1911), 264,

268-70, 360, 392-94.

^6. Danzel, Anfänge der Schrift, 34-38; Stewart Culin, “Chess and Playing Cards,” Report of the U.S. National Museum under the

Direction of the Smithsonian Institution

(1896): 881.

^7. Hanns Bächtold-Stäubli, Handwörterbuch des deutschen Aberglaubens, 10 vols. (Leipzig: de Gruyter, 1927-42), 6:1597-98; Stith

Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk-Literature

(Bloomington: Indiana University Press,

1955), D1314.1.1-5; Stewart Culin, “Games

of the North American Indians,” Annual

Report of the Bureau of American

Ethnology 24 (1902-1903): 36-43.

^8. On demon-arrows, see Ignaz Goldziher, Abhandlungen zur arabischen Philologie, 2

vols. (Leiden: Brill, 1896), 1:29-33, 87-89,

116-17; Bächtold-Stäubli, Handwörterbuch

des deutschen Aberglaubens, 6:1597; Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, ed. James E.

Stallybrass, 3 vols. (London: Sonnenschein

& Allen, 1880), 2:846. On the space-

traveling arrow of the wizards, Herodotus,

History IV, 36, cf. Erich Bethe, “Abaris,” in RE 1:16-17; James Darmesteter, The Zend-Avesta, 3 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1883), 2:153; Völuspá, 36-37.

^9. John M. Crawford, tr., Kalevala, 2 vols.

(New York: Columbian, 1891), 1:80-81;

Paul B. Du Chaillu, The Viking Age, 2 vols.

(New York: Scribner, 1890), 2:93-94; A. S.

Orlov, Kazakhskii Geroicheskii Epos

(Moscow: Academy of Sciences, 1945), 41,

n. 2; 83; N. K. Dmitriev, Turyetskie

Narodnye Skaski (Leningrad: Government Press, 1939), 98-102; Friedrich Giese,

Türkische Märchen (Jena: Diederich, 1925), 75-89.

^10. Jeremiah Curtin and J. N. B. Hewitt,

“Seneca Fiction, Legends, and Myths,”

Annual Report of the Bureau of American

Ethnology 32 (1910-1911): 317-18; Frank H. Cushing, “Zuñi Fetiches,” Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology 2

(1880-1881): 41-43; cf. Culin, “Chess and

Playing Cards,” 881, n. 1; Matilda C.

Stevenson, “The Zuñi Indians: Their

Mythology, Esoteric Societies, and Ceremonies,” Annual Report of the Bureau

of American Ethnology 23 (1901-1902):

317-49. The Arab hunter must call on Allah

with each bow-shot; Al-Bukhārī, Kitāb al-

Jāmic as-Sahīh, ed. M. Krehl and T. W.

Juynboll (Leiden: Brill, 1908), 4:7, and

breathe on his arrows, exactly like the Zuñi;

Georg Jacob, Altarabisches Beduinenleben

(Berlin: Mayer & Müller, 1897), 125. For

arrow-prayers in India, see Victor Henry, La magie dans l’Inde antique (Paris: Leroux, 1904), 151-52.

^11. Cushing, “Zuñi Fetiches,” 39; John P. Gillin, The Barama River Caribs of British

Guiana (Cambridge: Peabody Museum,

1936), 180, 183-84; Hoernes, Natur- und

Urgeschichte, 1:512.

^12. Eduard Seler, Gesammelte Abhandlungen zur amerikanischen Sprach- und

Altertumskunde, 5 vols. (Berlin: Asher, 1902), 3:378; Culin, “Chess and Playing

Cards,” 881; Edward W. Nelson, “The

Eskimo about Bering Strait,” Annual Report

of the Bureau of American Ethnology 18

(1896-1897): 157-61, cf. 154; Danzel,

Anfänge der Schrift, 34; Du Chaillu, Viking Age, 2:92-94. To give his arrows greater power and accuracy, Ishi changed the

markings on them; Saxton Pope, Hunting

with the Bow and Arrow (New York:

Putnam, 1947), 26-27.

^13. Saxo, Historia Danorum, ed. Hermann Jantzen (Berlin: Felber, 1900), 244; for the

Norse expressions, see Richard Cleasby,

Gudbrand Vigfusson, and William A.

Craigie, An Icelandic-English Dictionary,

2d ed. (Oxford: University Press, 1957), s.v.

“herör.”

^14. Karl Weinhold, “Beiträge zu den deutschen Kriegsaltertümern,” Sitzungsberichte der

Akademie der Wissenschaft zu Berlin.

Philosophisch-Historische Klasse 29

(1891): 548; the king’s arrow pursues

breakers of the King’s Peace; Bächtold-

Stäubli, Handwörterbuch des deutschen

Aberglaubens, 6:1598.

^15. Weinhold, “Beiträge zu den deutschen

Kriegsaltertümern,” 548; Finnur Jónsson, ed., Egils Saga Skalgrímssonar (Halle: Niemeyer, 1924), 9, n. 10.

^16. Cleasby and Vigfusson, Icelandic-English Dictionary, 42. The message-staff

( bothkefli) was readily “in einen Pfeil umgeschnitzt,” Weinhold, “Beiträge zu den

deutschen Kriegsaltertümern,” 548.

^17. Weinhold, “Beiträge zu den deutschen Kriegsaltertümern,” 548-49. German

Botenhölzer survived into the late Middle Ages; Saxo, Historia Danorum, ed. Jantzen, 244, n. 1. Summons-arrows were used by

the Seljuk Turks in the thirteenth century;

these still survive in North India, Hoernes,

Natur- und Urgeschichte, 1:521; cf. the

“alarm-staff” of the Lama gods; Charles A.

S. Williams, Outlines of Chinese Symbolism and Art Motives (Shanghai: Kelly and

Walsh, 1941), 213.

^18. Walter E. Roth, “An Introductory Study of the Arts, Crafts, and Customs of the Guiana

Indians,” Annual Report of the Bureau of

American Ethnology 38 (1916-1917): 582;

Walter E. Roth, “An Inquiry into the Animism and Folk-lore of the Guiana

Indians,” Annual Report of the Bureau of

American Ethnology 30 (1908-1909): 362; Garrick Mallery, “Pictographs of the North

American Indians,” Annual Report of the

Bureau of American Ethnology 4 (1882-

1883): 87-88; Walter J. Hoffman, “The

Midē’wiwin or Grand Medicine Society of

the Ojíbwa,” Annual Report of the Bureau

of American Ethnology 7 (1885-1886): pl.

xii facing p. 226.

^19. Apollo gave the staff to Hermes as a symbolon (Homer, Hymn to Hermes, 527-30) exactly as he gave an arrow- symbolon to his friend Abaris, the Hyperborean, who

used it as Hermes did his staff, to carry him

through the air as a messenger of the god;

O. Crusius, “Hyperboreer,” in Wilhelm H.

Roscher, ed., Ausführliches Lexikon der

griechischen und römischen Mythologie, 7

vols. (Hildesheim: Olms, 1965), 1:2819. On

the Hyperborean origin of Apollo’s arrow

and Hermes’ caduceus, see ibid., 1:2807-9.

^20. Crusius, “Hyperboreer,” in Roscher, Ausführliches Lexikon, 1:2815. Origen, Contra Celsum (Against Celsus) III, 31, in PG 11:959-60, reports the belief that Abaris shot himself through the air like an arrow, a

favorite trick of the Asiatic shaman.

^21. Robert Eitrem, “Hermes,” in RE 8:781-84, and Ernst Samter, “Caduceus,” in RE

3:1170-71. It is the arrow which gives the

title of Pantokrator, ibid., 8:791; Otto

Gruppe, Griechische Mythologie und

Religionsgeschichte, 2 vols. (Munich: Beck, 1906), 2:1072.

^22. Gellius, Attic Nights X, 27.

^23. Cf. Jeremiah 48:17; Ezekiel 19:10-14;Abraham S. Yahuda, The Accuracy of

the Bible (London: Heinemann, 1934), 106-13.

^24. Olaf-Tryggvason Saga, c. 102, 104, 222.

^25. Paul É. Dumont, L’Aśvamedha (Paris: Geuthner, 1927), 38, 356, 384, 386. See n.

17 above.

^26. Culin, “Games of the North American

Indians,” 33, 46; cf. Seler, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, 3:378-80, fig. 6, for recent Mexican Indian examples; Franz Boas, “The

Social Organization and the Secret Societies

of the Kwakiutl Indians,” Annual Report of the U.S. National Museum (1895): 508-9, 517, 521.

^27. James Mooney, “The Ghost Dance Religion and the Sioux Outbreak of 1890,” Annual

Report of the Bureau of American

Ethnology 14 (1892-1893): 832, 915-17; the conquest motif, 788-89.

^28. M. Gaster, “Divination (Jewish),” in James Hastings, Encyclopaedia of Religion and

Ethics, 13 vols. (New York: Scribner, 1928), 4:810, cf. Leonard W. King, “Divination

(Assyro-Babylonian),” in Hastings,

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics,

4:785; the Nimrod version is in the Book of Jasher 9:35.

^29. Albert J. Carnoy, Iranian Mythology, vol. 6

in Louis H. Gray, ed., Mythology of All

Races, 13 vols. (Boston: Jones, 1917), 302-3, 308; Darmesteter, Zend-Avesta, 2:94-96,

103; 1:18-21. The Zu-bird, contending for the government of the world, was smitten by

the arrow of the god, who thereupon

“founds his cities in the four regions,” Peter Jensen, Assyrisch-babylonische Mythen und

Epen (Berlin: Reuther and Reichard, 1900), 49-53.

^30. Carnoy, Iranian Mythology, 302-3, 308; Bächtold-Stäubli, Handwörterbuch des

deutschen Aberglaubens, 6:1598; Francis La Flesche, “The Osage Tribe: Rite of Vigil,”

Annual Report of the Bureau of American

Ethnology 39 (1917-1918): 234; Cushing,

“Zuñi Fetiches,” 42; Hoffman, “Menomini

Indians,” 196-99; Cicero, De Divinatione I, 17; Ludwig Weniger, “Feralis Exercitus,”

Archiv für Religionswissenschaft 9 (1906): 246-48.

^31. J. A. MacCulloch, Eddic Mythology, vol. 2

in Gray, Mythology of All Races, 201.

^32. E. Washburn Hopkins, “Remarks on the Form of Numbers, the Method of Using

Them, and Numerical Categories of the

Mahabharata,” JAOS 23 (1902): 144-47; the

arrow cast “is confined to estimating time.”

The Osage arrows that measure the earth “in

flight denote time” as well; La Flesche,

“Osage Tribe,” 207, 265-67, 369.

^33. Bruno Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, 2 vols. (Heidelberg: Winter, 1925), 2:275;

Benjamin Williams, “On the Land of

Ditmarsh and the Mark Confederation,”

Archaeologia 37 (1856): 381-83.

^34. Robert Riddell, “Some Accounts of a Symbol of Ancient Investitures in Scotland,”

Archaeologia 11 (1794): 47; Octavius

Morgan, “On Episcopal and Other Rings of

Investiture,” Archaeologia 36 (1855): 393-97; Williams, “On the Land of Ditmarsh,”

389.

^35. Flateyjarbók I, 164.

^36. See Aeschylus, Eumenides 727-30; Prometheus Bound 358-63, 374, 917; Vergil, Aeneid VI, 587; Hugo Winckler,

Keilinschriftliches Textbuch zum Alten

Testament (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1903), 117, 123; Williams, Chinese Symbolism, 396-97; 2 Kings 13:17-19; Psalms 7:13; 18:13-18;

64:7, and so forth; Zechariah 9:14; Qur’an 18:44; Bernhard Schweitzer, Herakles

(Tübingen: Mohr, 1922), 184-86; E. A.

Wallis Budge, Book of the Dead, Papyrus of Ani, 3 vols. (New York: Putnam, 1913), 2:400-401.

^37. Christian S. Blinkenberg, The Thunderweapon in Religion and Folklore

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

1911), 87-101; Gerald A. Wainwright, “The

Emblem of Min,” JEA 17 (1931): 186-93; Gerald A. Wainwright, “Letopolis,” JEA 18

(1932): 161-63; and Gerald A. Wainwright,

“The Bull Standards of Egypt,” JEA 19

(1933): 43; Gruppe, Griechische

Mythologie und Religionsgeschichte, 2:773, n. 3.

^38. Hermann Kees, Ägypten, in Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft, vol. 3, pt. 1, 3a (Munich: Beck, 1933), 177; Psalms 45:6;

Winckler, Keilinschriftliches Textbuch zum Alten Testament, 117, 123; Henry, Magie dans l’Inde antique, 151-63; R. C. Boer, ed., Orvar-Odds Saga (Halle: Niemeyer,

1892), vii-ix, xiv-xv, 14, 69; Crawford, tr., Kalevala, 1:167, 2:434, 530; when the hero twangs his bow, Zeus himself thunders in

the heavens, Homer, Odyssey XXI, 410-14.

^39. Culin, “Chess and Playing Cards,” 881; cf.

Hoernes, Natur-und Urgeschichte, 1:562-64.

^40. Herodotus, History IV, 81.

^41. Jean Joinville, Histoire de St. Louis (Paris: Hachette, 1883), xciii, 475-78 (Tartars);

Clément I. Huart and Louis Delaporte,

L’Iran antique: Élam et Perse et la

civilisation iranienne (Paris: Michel, 1952), 381; Friedrich von Spiegel, Erânische

Altertumskunde, 3 vols. (Leipzig:

Engelmann, 1871-78), 2:86-87; Carnoy,

Iranian Mythology, 302-3, 308; that these are census arrows appears from Havamal

120a, 130a; for the Indians, see Boas,

“Kwakiutl Indians,” 522; Garrick Mallery,

“Picture Writing of the American Indians,”

Annual Report of the Bureau of American

Ethnology 10 (1888-1889): 365; Culin,

“Games of the North American Indians,”

227-29 (fig. 307), 51, 233-34.

^42. Hoernes, Natur- und Urgeschichte, 1:521, n.

1 (India); C. R. Lepsius, “Der Bogen in der

Hieroglyphik,” Zeitschrift für ägyptische

Sprache und Alterthumskunde 10 (1872): 86, cf. Wainwright, “The Emblem of Min,”

190-91; James G. Frazer, The Golden

Bough, 12 vols., 3d ed. (New York:

Macmillan, 1935), 9:126 (Koryak); René

Grousset et al., L’Asie orientale des

origines au XVe siècle (Paris: Presses universitaires, 1941), 442.

^43. Proto-Evangelium of James 9:1; Clement, Epistola I ad Corinthios (First Epistle to the Corinthians) 43, in PG 1:295; Angelo S.

Rappoport, Myth and Legend of Ancient

Israel, 3 vols. (London: Gresham, 1928), 2:254-58.

^44. Qur’an 3:39.

^45. Clement, First Epistle to the Corinthians 43, in PG 1:295.

^46. Gaster, “Divination (Jewish),” in Hastings, Encyclopaedia 4:809-10.

^47. Julius Wellhausen, Reste arabischen Heidentums (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1927), 132; Culin, “Games of the North American

Indians,” 383, 33, 45; cf. W. J. McGee,

“The Seri Indians,” Annual Report of the

Bureau of American Ethnology 17 (1895-

1896): 198-200; Wainwright, “Letopolis,”

162, and “Bull Standards of Egypt,” 50-51;

Egidio Forcellini, Lexicon Totius Latinatatis, s.v. “baculus,” no. 9.

^48. Dmitriev, Turyetskie Narodnye Skaski, 203-5; Giese, Türkische Märchen, 115.

^49. Georg A. Finsler, Homer, 2 vols., 2d ed.

(Leipzig: Teubner, 1913-18), 1:1:84.

^50. Aristotle, The Athenian Constitution LXV, 1-4; Aristophanes, Ecclesiazusae 297.

^51. Crusius, “Hyperboreer,” in Roscher, Ausführliches Lexikon, 1:2819.

^52. See Hugh Nibley, “Sparsiones,” Classical Journal 40 (June 1945): 538-39, nn. 152-54; reprinted in this volume, pages 189-90,

nn. 152-54.

^53. Qur’an 2:216; Ahlwardt, ed., al-Mucallaqat

II, 104; IV, 73-74; VI, 63; Theodor Noldeke, Delectus Veterum Carminum

Arabicorum (Berlin: Keuther, 1890), 36, 77; Wellhausen, Reste arabischen Heidentums,

131-33; George Sale, The Koran

(Philadelphia: Moore, 1850), 89; cf. the

story of cA’isha in the Sahīh of Bukhārī in Ernest Harder, Arabische Chrestomathie

(Heidelberg: Groos, 1911), 21, and Al-

Harīrī, Maqamāt, s.v. “wasm.”

^54. Pastor of Hermes, Similitudes VIII, 1-6.

^55. Du Chaillu, Viking Age, 1:350-51; Jónsson, Egils Saga Skalgrímssonar, 137 (XLVIII, 6-7); Boer, ed., Orvar-Odds Saga, 38, 9-10;

“Hvers mannz skeyti var thar markat”; cf.

Havamal 8a.

^56. Mallery, “Picture Writing,” 365-66; cf. Boas,

“Kwakiutl Indians,” 522-23.

^57. Boer, ed., Orvar-Odds Saga, 39, 9-13.

^58. As Boer, ibid., has shown in his edition of the saga.

^59. Jacob, Altarabisches Beduinenleben, 89-90, 110-12.

^60. Danzel, Anfänge der Schrift, 39; James G.

Frazer, Folklore in the Old Testament, 3

vols. (London: Macmillan, 1919), 1:415;

Boas, “Kwakiutl Indians,” 522-23; Cushing,

“Zuñi Fetiches,” 32.

^61. Nibley, “Sparsiones,” 537-39, reprinted in this volume, pages 161-62.

^62. Joinville, Histoire de St. Louis, 93, 475-78.

^63. The Algonquins used fifty-two rods; Culin,

“Games of the North American Indians,”

49; the Hupa fifty-three, ibid., 235; the Sauk and Fox fifty-one, ibid., 233; cf. 228, fig.

307, 45.

^64. Alice C. Fletcher and Francis La Flesche,

“The Omaha Tribe,” Annual Report of the

Bureau of American Ethnology 27 (1905-

1906): 242; Francis La Flesche, “Omaha

Bow and Arrow Makers,” Annual Report of

the Smithsonian Institution (1926): 494.

^65. Herodotus, History IV, 67; Ammianus Marcellinus, XXXI, 2, 24.

^66. The Persian king, sitting with the baresma of divination spread out before him as he gives

away wealth at the New Year (Carnoy, Iranian Mythology, 299-300), recalls the host at the Indian feast, giving all his wealth to his guests, whose arrow-staves lie spread

out before him, Boas, “Kwakiutl Indians,”

508; Hoenir’s lottery in the Golden Age

( Völuspá, in Lawrence S. Thompson, ed., Norse Mythology: The Elder Edda in Prose

Translation [Hamden, CT: Archon, 1974], 17) and the King of Babylon “shaking out

arrows,” Meissner, Babylonien und

Assyrien, 2:275; Ezekiel 21:26.

^67. Clement, First Epistle to the Corinthians 43, in PG 1:295.

^68. Ernst Samter, “Fasces,” in RE 6:2002-3.

^69. Culin, “Chess and Playing Cards,” 881; cf.

W. M. Flinders Petrie, Scarabs and

Cylinders with Names (London: School of Archaeology in Egypt, 1917), 4. Theodore

C. Foote, “The Ephod,” Journal of Biblical Literature 21 (1902): 20-47.

^70. Alexandre Moret, Histoire de l’Orient, 2

vols. (Paris: Presses universitaires, 1941),

1:96-97.

^71. Hermann V. Hilprecht, The Babylonian Expedition of the University of

Pennsylvania, 11 vols. (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 1896), 1:2:36;

William H. Ward, The Seal Cylinders of

Western Asia (Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institution, 1910), 3-4. If the cylinder seal

was derived from a cylinder amulet, Ernst

Herzfeld, “Stempelsiegel,” Archäologische

Mitteilungen aus Iran 5 (1932): 51-53, the marked arrow itself is such an amulet.

^72. Alfred Jeremias, “Nebo,” in Roscher, Ausführliches Lexikon, 3:64-65; Gustavus H. Eisen, Ancient Oriental and Other Seals (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1940), 78-79; M. H. Ananikian, Armenian

Mythology, vol. 7 in Gray, Mythology of All Races, 32-33 (Nabu); Alfred Jeremias, Handbuch der altorientalischen

Geisteskultur (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1913), 82, 89-94, 114, 275, 277 (Nabu-Nebo as

Hermes-Mercury), 11, 18, 132, 146

(Nisaba, equivalent of Egyptian Neith);

Budge, Book of the Dead, 1:186; cf. Gerald

A. Wainwright, “Some Celestial Associations of Min,” JEA 21 (1935): 154. On

Texctlipoca, the Mexican Apollo-Hermes, as

arrow-god, see Seler, Gesammelte

Abhandlungen, 3:341.

^73. John Rhys, Celtic Heathendom (London: Williams & Norgate, 1898), 268; G. Dottin,

“Divination (Celtic),” in Hastings,

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics,

4:788; Charles Vallency, “Observations of

the Alphabet of the Pagan Irish, and of the

Age in Which Finn and Oslin Lived,”

Archaeologia 7 (1785): 276-85; Hoernes, Natur- und Urgeschichte, 2:304; John A.

MacCulloch, “Die Kelten,” in Alfred

Bertholet and Edvard Lehmann, eds.,

Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte, 2 vols., 4th ed. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1925), 2:610.

Taken together, these references make the

case clear. Rune, arrow, and feasting-ticket

are plainly identical in Havamal 8a, 120a, 130a.

^74. Jónsson, Egils Saga Skalgrímssonar, 240-41

(LXXII, 12-16); Du Chaillu, Viking Age,

2:92; Williams, “On the Land of Ditmarsh,”

381-83; Jacob, Altarabisches

Beduinenleben, 110, n. 2. The oldest runes appear on arrowheads, Blinkenberg,

Thunderweapon, 85; e.g., the Kovel

spearhead. The strongest rune was an arrow,

Williams, “On the Land of Ditmarsh,” 388.

^75. Culin, “Chess and Playing Cards,” 887.

^76. Jensen, Assyrisch-babylonische Mythen und Epen, 45, 47; cf. E. D. Van Buren, “Seals of the Gods,” Studi e materiali di storia delle religioni 10 (1934): 170; Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols.

(Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of

America, 1947), 4:151; Wellhausen, Reste

arabischen Heidentums, 133.

^77. Herzfeld, “Stempelsiegel,” 53.

^78. Jack Finegan, Light from the Ancient Past (Princeton: Princeton University Press,

1959), 24-26.

^79. Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk-Literature, F1066; Uno Holmberg, Finno-Ugric

Siberian [Mythology] (Boston:

Archaeological Institute of America, 1927), 404; Crawford, tr., Kalevala, 1:287;

Herodotus, History V, 105; G. M. Bolling,

“Divination (Vedic),” in Hastings,

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics,

4:829; Roth, “Animism and Folk-lore of

Guiana Indians,” 361.

^80. Max Seligsohn, “Nimrod,” in Isidore Singer, ed., Jewish Encylopedia, 12 vols. (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1905), 9:309-11;

Book of Jasher 9:29.

^81. Herodotus, History IV, 26; James G. Frazer,

“The War of Earth on Heaven,” in

Apollodorus, 2 vols. (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1921), 2:318-26;

Crawford, tr., Kalevala, 1:287; Book of Jasher 9:20-26.

^82. Karl Preisendanz, “Nimrod,” in RE 17:624-28; Alfred Jeremias, Das Alte Testament im Lichte des alten Orients (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1916), 158-60; Book of Jasher 7:29-47; Clementine Recognitiones I, 30-31, in PG

1:1224-25. Josef Grivel, “Nemrod et les

écritures cunéiformes,” Transactions of the

Society of Biblical Archaeology 3 (1874): 141-43, gives a list of his sinister epithets.

^83. Qur’an 2:258.

^84. Sale, Koran, 269, note e; Otto Keller, Die antike Tierwelt, 2 vols. (Leipzig: Cramer, 1913), 2:447-51. The godless of Jurhum

were destroyed in the same way, according

to Al-Bakrī, in Kitāb Mucjam mā Istacjam:

Das geographische Wörterbuch des Abu

cObeid cAbdallah ben cAbd el-cAzîz el-

Bekrî, ed. Ferdinand Wüstenfeld, 2 vols.

(Göttingen: Deuerlich, 1876-77), 1:25.

^85. Babylonian Talmud Sanhedrin 95a.

^86. Strabo, Geography VII, 4, 6.

^87. Lucian, De Saltatione (On the Dance) 46, includes Odysseus among other mad giants.

^88. Raymond O. Faulkner, “The ‘Cannibal Hymn’ from the Pyramid Texts,” JEA 10

(1925): 102, 97-103; Anton Deimel,

Sumerische Grammatik (Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1924), 142.

^89. Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, 3:918-50; Ludwig Laistner, Das Rätsel der Sphinx, 2

vols. (Berlin: Hetz, 1889), 2:156, 225-28, 243-50.

^90. Harold Peake and Herbert J. Fleure, The Steppe and the Sown (New Haven: Yale

University Press, 1928), 59.

^91. Phillip H. Leathes, “Exemption from the Forest Laws,” Archaeologia 15 (1806): 209-24; Samuel Pegge, “On the Hunting of the

Ancient Inhabitants of Our Island, Britons

and Saxons,” Archaeologia 10 (1792): 165-66; Dains Barrington, “Observations of the

Practice of Archery in England,”

Archaeologia 7 (1785): 47, 50.

^92. Grousset, L’Asie orientale, 304-5, 307; Hoernes, Natur- und Urgeschichte, 2:122, 392-403.

^93. On its sudden neglect, Hoernes, Natur- und Urgeschichte, 2:487-88, 275-77; Sophus Müller, Nordische Altertumskunde, 2 vols.

(Strassburg: Trübner, 1897): 1:253; Meyer,

“Bows and Arrows in Central Brazil,” 553,

560; Lucien M. Turner, “Ethnology of the

Ungava District, Hudson Bay Territory,”

Annual Report of the Bureau of American

Ethnology 11 (1888-1889): 312; La Flesche,

“Omaha Bow and Arrow Makers,” 487-88;

Finsler, Homer, 1:2:69-71. On its readoption, Ernest Sprockhoff, “Pfeilspitze,” in Max

Ebert, Reallexicon der Vorgeschichte, 14

vols. (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1924), 10:106;

Müller, Nordische Altertumskunde, 2:131; F.

Lammert, “Pfeil,” in RE 19:2:1427.

^94. Pliny, Natural History XVI, 65.

^95. Sprockhoff, “Pfeilspitze,” 10:106, cf. 102-3; Peake and Fleure, Steppe and the Sown, 32; Carl Schuchhardt, Alteuropa (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1935), 135-37; Carleton S. Coon,

The Races of Europe (New York:

Macmillan, 1939), 166-68, 46-48, 71-74.

^96. A few examples: Enuma Elish (Babylonian Creation Hymn) IV, 101-47; Heinrich

Schäfer, “Der Speer des Horus,” Zeitschrift für ägyptische Sprache und

Alterthumskunde 41 (1904): 68-70; Lepsius,

“Der Bogen in der Hieroglyphik,” 80, 85;

Wainwright, “Letopolis,” 162; Darmesteter,

Zend-Avesta, 2:297; Wernicke, “Apollon,” in RE 2:23; Crawford, tr., Kalevala, 2:434

(Book 26); 1:284 (Book 19); M. Lauer, ed., Des Moses von Chorene Geschichte Gross-Armeniens (Regensburg: Manz, 1865), 22; Edward T. Werner, Myths and Legends of

China (London: Harrap, 1922), 182; Culin,

“Games of the North American Indians,”

32-35.

^97. For extensive comparisons, Blinkenberg, Thunderweapon, passim; Arthur B. Cook, Zeus, 3 vols. (Cambridge: University Press, 1914-40), 2:473, 574, 774, 777, 780, 786-89, 798-806, 1045-49; Edward D. Clarke,

“On the Lituus of the Ancient Romans,”

Archaeologia 19 (1821): 386-400; H. B.

Walters, “Poseidon’s Trident,” Journal of

Hellenic Studies 13 (1892-93): 13-20;

Benjamin W. Bacon, “Eagle and Basket on

the Antioch Chalice,” Annals of American

Schools of Oriental Research 5 (1923-24): 6-8, 19; Yahuda, Accuracy of the Bible,

106-13.

^98. For China, see Culin, “Chess and Playing Cards,” 882-83; on Ghenghis Khan and

Prester John, see The Travels of Marco

Polo, ed. Manuel Komroff (Garden City: Garden City, 1926), 87-88 (I, 49), the arrow

nature of the staves being clear from William

Crooke, Religion and Folklore of Northern

India (Oxford: University Press, 1926), 309-10. On wands of office in the Near East,

Clarke, “Lituus,” 398; cf. the chart by T.

Canaan, “Mohammedan Saints and

Sanctuaries in Palestine,” Journal of the

Palestine Oriental Society 6 (1926): 129, pl. 4, who also shows how the weapon

became a banner, 121, 123, 125-29; cf. Al-

Wāqidī, Futūḥ al-Shām (Calcutta: Thomas, 1854), 34; Joseph von Karabacek, “Zur

orientalischen Altertumskunde I:

Sarazenische Wappen,” Sitzungsberichte

der kaiserlichen Akademie der

Wissenschaften in Wien. Philologisch-

historische Klasse 157 (1908): 20-21.

^99. Frederick J. E. Raby, A History of Secular Latin Poetry in the Middle Ages, 2 vols.

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1934), 1:13-15; the

pedigree of the Imperial eagle is Asiatic;

Bacon, “Eagle and Basket,” 7. On Khian as

first Cosmocrator, Moret, Histoire de l’Orient, 1:475.

^100. Bertram Thomas, Arabia Felix (New York: Scribner, 1932), 204, n. 1; 379, 69; Danzel,

Anfänge der Schrift, 35. That the wasm of heraldry was originally an arrow-mark is

clear from Al-Ḥarīrī, Maqamāt, index, s.v.

" wasm al-qidh. "

^101. Williams, “On the Land of Ditmarsh,” 384-87; Danzel, Anfänge der Schrift, 34-41; Edwin Freshfield, “Mason’s Marks at

Westminster Hall,” Archaeologia 50 (1887): 2-4. “The Marks of Sundrye of Chief Mene

of Virginia” (1590), as published in William

W. Tooker, “The Swastika and Other Marks

among the Eastern Algonkins,” American

Antiquarian 20 (1898): 339-40, are all arrows.

^102. As in Scotland the arrow “crest” reproduces the mark of the owner’s tartan, so the Arabs

call the marked arrow and the striped

garment of the nobility by the same name,

sahm; Edward W. Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon (London: William & Norgate,

1872), 1:4:1454-55, no. 8; Mal’ūf, Al-Munjid (Beirut: Al-Tabca al-Kāthawlīkīya, 1937), 30, s.v. “burd”; Ahlwardt, ed.,

Mucallaqat I, 79. For a like identity in the New World, see Meyer, “Bows and Arrows

in Central Brazil,” 553.

^103. Hoernes, Natur- und Urgeschichte, 1:550-57.

^104. August Wünsche, Salomons Thron und Hippodrom, Abbilder des babylonischen

Himmelsbildes (Leipzig: Pfeiffer, 1906), passim; August von Gall, Basileia tou

Theou (Heidelberg: Winter, 1926), 128-205; Morris Jastrow, “Adam and Eve in

Babylonian Literature,” American Journal

of Semitic Languages and Literatures 15

(1899): 193-214; Darmesteter, Zend-Avesta, 1:11-12, 15-18; 2:98-101, 202; Albrecht

Götze, Kleinasien (Munich: Beck, 1933), 133-35; Michael Psellus, Xiphilin 442-44; Lucian, De Astrologio 987; Dio

Chrysostom, Oratations XL, 32-41; XXXII, 63-66. Friedrich Dieterici, Thier und

Mensch vor dem König der Genien (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1879). Thaclabi, in

Rudolf Brünnow, Chrestomathy of Arabic

Prose-Pieces (Berlin: Reuther & Reichard, 1895), 2. The literature on this theme is very voluminous. For early Christian versions,

see Clement, First Epistle to the

Corinthians 43, in PG 1:295; Apostolic Constitutions II, 56-57, in PG 1:722-38.

^105. The Travels of Marco Polo, Komroff, ed., 104-8 (I, 60-61) (Great Khan); Grousset,

L’Asie orientale, 341-43, 367, 364 (China and Indochina): Huart and Delaporte, L’Iran Antique, 283, 372; Eduard Meyer,

Geschichte des Altertums, 4 vols. (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1925-44), 4:37, 39, 55, 56 (Persia);

Jeremias, Handbuch der altorientalischen

Geisteskultur, 177-80, 193; Daniel 4:21-37

(Babylonian-Assyrian).

^106. William W. Tarn, “Ptolemey II,” JEA 14

(1928): 247; Constantine Porphyrogenitus,

De Caeremoniis Aulae Byzantinae (On the

Ritual of the Byzantine Court), Joseph J.

Reiske, ed., in Corpus Scriptorum Historiae

Byzantinae, 2 vols. (Bonn: Weber, 1829), 1:404-6 (I, 89); Corippus, Justin II, 62; Byzantine Ceremonialbook (tenth century) in Gustav Soytes, Byzantinische

Geschichtschreiber und Chronisten

(Heidelberg: Winter, 1929), 33. On the

Baghdad version, Adam Mez, The

Renaissance of Islam (London: Luzac,

1937), 199.

^107. Al-Bīrūnī, Chronologie orientalischer Völker, ed. Eduard C. Sachau (Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 1923), 226; cf., Mez,

Renaissance of Islam, 419. The ancient feast of Artemis the huntress at Laphria was

such an animal-drive, Pausanius,

Description of Greece VII, 18, 8-13. On the jiwār, Jacob, Altarabisches Beduinenleben, 83, 220-21; cf. Hermann Gollancz, The

Book of Protection (London: Oxford

University Press, 1912), xxxiv, xliii-xliv, esp.

lxxxiv (no. 24); Ginzberg, Legends of the

Jews, 4:142; Bächtold-Stäubli,

Handwörterbuch des deutschen

Aberglaubens, 6:1400, 1404-6. See

especially A. F. L. Beeston, “The Ritual Hunt: A Study in Old South Arabian

Religious Practice,” Le Muséon 61 (1948): 183-96.

^108. W. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites (London: Black, 1901), 95-96;

Boaz Cohen, “An Essay on Jewish Law,”

Proceedings of the American Academy of

Jewish Research 6 (1934-35): 124-25, 127, 136; Walter Ashburner, “The Farmer’s

Law,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 30

(1910): 97; 32 (1912): 87. Cf. Plutarch,

Solon XV, 5; Hesiod, Erga (Works and Days) 272-314; Varro, De Re Rustica I, 10, 2; Plutarch, Numa 16; Dionysius of

Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities III, 1, 3-5.

^109. John Y. Akerman, “On Some of the Weapons of the Celtic and Teutonic Races,”

Archaeologia 34 (1852): 186. Yet in the Middle Ages only the rich used the bow;

Thomas D. Kendrick, A History of the

Vikings (New York: Scribner, 1930), 35; Müller, Nordische Altertumskunde, 1:253,

148; cf. La Flesche, “Osage Tribe,” 364.

^110. Hilary Jenkinson, “Exchequer Tallies,”

Archaeologia 62 (1911): 367-80; “Medieval Tallies, Public and Private,” Archaeologia 74 (1924): 289-324.

Tenting, Toll, and Taxing

Even in the great classic treatises on the

state, its image is never without a sinister

side. The combination of unlimited power

and limited wisdom can never be a

reassuring one, but it is the actual behavior

of sovereign states and princes that is most

disturbing. The key to understanding the

behavior of delinquents, we are often told, is an insight into early background and

environment. It is the purpose of this paper

to show how the state spent the most

impressionable years of its childhood living

as an orphan of the storm in tents of

vagabonds where it acquired many of the

habits and attitudes that still condition its

activities.

Scene I—An Open Place: Thunder and Lightning

It was not until early in the present

century that H. M. Chadwick pointed out

what should have been obvious to everyone,

namely, that epic literature, a large and

important segment of the human record, is the

product not of unrestrained poetic fancy but

of real years of terror and gloom through

which the entire race has been forced to pass

from time to time.1 We now have good reason to believe, after many years of

controversy and discussion, scientific and

otherwise, that the violence of the elements

that forms the somber backdrop of the “Epic

Milieu” was more than a literary convention.

Many ancient sources recall that after the

waters of the Flood had subsided there came

a great “Windflood” which converted large

areas of the world to sandy deserts; A.

Haldar considers the Sumerian version of the

Windflood to be “an excellent example of a text describing historical events in terms of

religious language.” 2 The historical reality is attested by windblown sand deposits from

various and widely separated periods, which

can be broadly correlated with some of the

major migrations of peoples. 3

According to S. N. Kramer, “The

factors primarily responsible for the more

characteristic features of the Greek, Indian,

and Teutonic Heroic Ages” were at work “in

the ancient Near East as a whole” in the

earliest recorded times. 4 These factors, i.e., a Völkerwanderungszeit and a general

disintegration of civilization, are always

accompanied and aggravated if not caused

by violent and prolonged atmospheric

disturbances. Wherever we turn, the earliest

records of the race offer the surprisingly

uniform portrait of a wandering storm-driven

hero—a Horus, Enlil, Marduk, Mazda, Zeus,

Teshub, Celtic Mercury, or Norse Othinn, to name but a few—mounted on his thunder-wagon and leading his toiling hosts across

the windy steppes while the earth trembles

and the sky gives forth with appalling

electrical displays. 5

Biologists today are calling attention to

the interesting theory that when man, ages

before any recorded Völkerwanderung, was forced out of whatever tropical paradise his

body was and still is designed to inhabit, it

was necessary for him to devise a system of

air-conditioning in order to survive in a

hostile alien environment. Within his clothes, as Sir Dudley Stamp observes, even the

Eskimo “is living . . . in the steamy heat of

the Amazon Forest.” But the air he breathes

must also be tempered, and this is possible

only in the confines of a house which, since

its owner must keep moving, is necessarily a

portable house.6 During the crucial

migrational phases of their existence, men have had to live in tents, superbly practical

dwellings which, aside from making survival

possible, have always satisfied the two

deepest “felt needs” of the race, namely, the

yearning for change and adventure and the

equally strong craving for protection and

security. The tent of the migratory chief is, as J. Morgenstern informs us, both the

protective palladium of the tribe and its

invitation to journey “through a totally

unknown country.” 7

We have pointed out elsewhere in this

volume that the earliest kings or leaders of

the people lived in tents. 8 Pharaoh, who ruled over the least migratory of people,

performed every major function of his

ritualized existence in a tent. 9 Even the pillars of his palace suggest the poles of a

tent that protects the wanderer by night in a

strange land (cf. fig. 4). 10 Anu, the first and

highest of Mesopotamian deities, is “the rider of the storms who occupies the dais

[tent] of sovereignty. ”11 The tent of Moses was a palladium for wandering Israel in “the

desert of darkness.” 12 And when the oldest cities were overwhelmed by the great wind,

the only refuge for the Lady Ishtar herself

was in the tents of the nomads, which have

ever been the asylum for the outcast and the

last redoubt of afflicted humanity under siege by the elements. 13 And if deity and sovereignty dwell in tents, such tents are

understandably the proper place for oracular

consultations, solemn counsel, and inspired

leadership. 14

Figure 4. The gold-covered

portable canopy and furniture of

Queen Hetepheres (A) enable us to

see the refined taste of Old

Kingdom art, c. 2500 B.C. The same

kind of elegant columns were used

centuries later by Thutmose III in

his Festival Hall (B) at Karnak, c.

1440 B.C., where he described it as

a great ritual tent built to last

millions of years.

Figure 5. Long before Islam, each

Bedouin tribe had its own portable

shrine, the focus of its spiritual life.

A dome-shaped shrine (A) rides

atop a camel on this stone relief

from the Temple of Bel, Palmyra,

Syria, A.D. 32. Note the women’s

full-body veil, a practice still being

debated in the Islamic world. The

maḥmal camel shrine (B) persisted

into the later pilgrimages to Mecca,

as shown in this festive manuscript

illumination from Baghdad, A.D.

1237. This Egyptian version of the

maḥmal (C), destined for Mecca, is

shown in an English engraving, C.

1880. The custom lasted until 1952,

when it was abolished as being

idolatrous.

Figure 6. From the earliest example of the wheeled vehicle in Egypt (A)

to its present-day descendant (H),

the persistence of these sacred

wheeled boats with their carrying

poles demonstrates the critical

importance of being able to move

across all types of terrain, both in

this life and the next. (A) Funeral

sledge on wheels, c. 1700 B.C. (B)

Model barge on wheels, c. 1554-

1529 B.C. (C) Funeral wagon, c.

350-300 B.C.

Discovered in Gaza, Israel, a

Jewish silver coin (D) of 450-300

B.C. shows a seated figure on a

winged, wheeled throne, a reminder

that the throne of God is commonly

called the merkāḇāh, wagon or

boat, in Jewish literature. Made

under Greek influence, it resembles

Dionysius on his winged, wheeled throne (E) from a Greek vase of

500-400 B.C.

Thus the immovable throne of God

moves forward on wheels, as also

shown by the Ark of the Covenant

on an oxcart (F), Dura Europos

Synagogue, Iraq, c. A.D. 250, as

well as the throne of Christ pulled

by the beasts of the four quarters

(G), apse painting, Bawait, Egypt,

c. A.D. 500-600. (H) Ship-wagon

procession in honor of an Islamic

saint, Luxor, Egypt, 1960.

Figure 7. With the winged symbol of

Ahura Mazda protecting them from

above, Darius sites enthroned with

his heir Xerxes standing behind him

under a large canopy of tasseled

netting (A). Though appearing majestically immovable, the kings

are being carried forward by

twenty-eight representatives of the

Empire supporting a large platform

whose feet are carefully carved to

show that it is lifted up off the

ground. (A) Palace doorway,

Persepolis, c. 500 B.C. This motif is

also used on the five royal tombs

nearby (B).

In this recently discovered chariot

tomb of a Germanic chieftain (C),

600-550 B.C., a unique bronze

couch served him in death as it had

in life. Thought to have been

imported from the south, it is

supported by eight lady unicyclists

(D) lifting and carrying the king

forward, as did their Persian

counterparts.

The ancient tribal shrines of the Near East known variously as cuṭfa, markab,

maḥmal (cf. fig. 5), qubba, bait, ’aron, teḇeṯ, and so forth, all had two

characteristics in common: they were,

according to Morgenstern, “all tents or tent-

like structures,” usually dome-shaped, and

all were mounted on a box-like frame or

understructure whose common name of

merkab meant either wagon or ship, and shows that it was meant to provide

mobility. 15 In an important study A. Alföldi has recently made it possible for the student

to enjoy the surprising spectacle of great

royal tents moving all over the ancient world

on their ceremonial wagons (cf. fig. 12, p.

120),16 while J. Smolian now describes the ritual itinerary of such vehicula sacra (cf.

fig. 6) in Europe and the East as common to

both kings and gods. 17 Both studies discuss the cosmic nature of the wheel-borne dome-

shaped shrine or royal baldachin, for paradoxical as it may seem, such symbols of

supreme stability as the throne, temple, holy

city, and even sacred world-mountain are

often depicted either as revolving wheels or

as mounted and moving on wheels (cf. figs.

7, p. 40, and 11, p. 117). 18

Throughout the ancient world divinity

and royalty, following the course and

example of the heavenly bodies, moved

through the spaces above and below in

covered wagons or boats or in a combination

of the two—the carrus navalis or ship-

wagon of the carnival procession. 19 Such vehicles were floats, moving through space

in a state of vehicles were floats, moving

through space in a state of suspension

between heaven and earth. 20 As the early migrants moved across the empty plains

where, as Altheim has noted, the cleansing

winds remove all tracks and landmarks,

leaving only the stars as familiar guide-posts and companions,21 they felt themselves to be moving among the heavenly bodies, and

actually that is what they were doing. 22 In ritual and mythology the distinction between

earth-travel and sky-travel often disappears,

while the ceaseless play of lightning in the

background is a constant reminder that the

tremendous powers of the upper world are

terribly real and not too far away. 23

Holy Camp and Holy City

For the nomads the qubba or domed red

leather tent of the chief is the qibla by which the tribe when it camps takes its bearings in

space (cf. fig. 5, p. 37), the qubba itself being oriented with reference to the heavenly

bodies. 24 For the Asiatics as well as the Romans the royal tent was a templum or tabernaculum, a sort of sacred

observatory, 25 being like the tabernacle of the camp of Israel and at the same time a

kind of planetarium or “model of all the

cosmos.” 26 The central pole of the tent is commonly identified with the pole of the

heavens, 27 and the tent itself with the Weltenmantel or expanse of the firmament;28

other tent-poles sometimes represent the four

cardinal points or the two turning-points of

the Sun at the summer and winter solstices. 29

The tent-pole theme is carried over into the

pillars of temples and palaces, and even into

the columns of medieval churches and the

stately facades of our own public

buildings. 30

The orientation of shrines, temples,

cities, and countries to represent earthly

counterparts of the cosmos has been the

subject of intensive investigation of recent

years. The first cities are now believed to

have arisen around sacred shrines, of which the city itself, then the whole land, and

finally the entire earth was thought to be an

organic extension. 31 It has also become apparent that the shrine or temple, which in

time sought to draw all things into its orbit, always made its first appearance as a tent. 32

The classic example is that portable tent that sheltered the Ark of the Covenant on its

travels, for which Solomon’s temple served

only as a sort of temporary resting-place. 33

The archaic ritual tents of the Pharaohs have

their exact counterparts in the cult-huts of the Mandu, which in turn have been shown to be

identical in form and function to the earliest reed-shrines of Mesopotamia as well as to

the oldest Indo-European tent-shrines.34

And if the first temples were tents, the

first cities, whether in Asia, Africa, or

Europe, were camps. 35 That fact is the key to

the whole problem of the Holy City or hierocentric state, according to Korvin-Krasiński’s observation: “The quartered

pattern of the world and space with the cultic shrine in the center as representing a scale-model of the entire creation, is actually

incomparably older than the world capital,”

having its origin “in the ceremonial camp,”

from which the pattern passed over to the

city by way of the great Megalithic ritual

complexes.36 We long ago called attention to the ceremonial camps that sprang up around

the great hierocentric shrines during the

year-rites, and to the manner in which they

gave rise to certain enduring economic,

political, artistic, and religious features of our civilization. 37

The most wonderful thing about

Jerusalem the Holy City is its mobility: at

one time it is taken up to heaven and at

another it descends to earth or even makes a

rendezvous with the earthly Jerusalem at some point in space halfway between. 38 In this respect both the city and the temple are

best thought of in terms of a tent, according

to Jerome,39 while the Church itself is also best represented as a tent, at least until the time comes when the saints “will no longer

have to use a movable tent,” according to the

early Fathers, 40 who get the idea from the New Testament. 41 The Jewish sectaries of the desert referred to the law itself as “the

royal tent,” 42 and thought of themselves quite literally as the camp of Israel sharing their

tents with the heavenly hosts.43 The idea of the heavenly tent or Holy City as a place of

safety suspended above the earth meets us

also in the holy mountain and the shrine or

city that stands upon it, 44 the holy island of which the circular Atlantis is a type,45 such floating shrines as Noah’s Ark and the moon-

boat of the Syrian Goddess, 46 and in such mysterious structures as the Hippodrome,

Hadrian’s Villa (cf. fig. 8), and the Kacba,

all of which were thought of as floating in

their own space remote from contaminating

earthly contacts. 47 It is now fairly certain, moreover, that the great temples of the

ancients were not designed to be dwelling-

houses of deity but rather stations or landing-places, fitted with inclined ramps, stairways, passageways, waiting-rooms, elaborate

systems of gates, and so forth, for the

convenience of traveling divinities, whose

sacred boats and wagons stood ever ready to

take them on their endless junkets from

shrine to shrine and from festival to festival through the cosmic spaces (cf. fig. 6, pp. 38-39)48 The Great Pyramid itself, we are now assured, is the symbol not of immovable

stability but of constant migration and

movement between the worlds;49 and the

ziggurats of Mesopotamia, far from being immovable, are reproduced in the seven-stepped throne of the thundering sky-wagon50

Tent and City as Survival Outposts

In the oldest records of the race, as

Haldar has shown, the desert was a fearful

reality, “the dead-world of the steppe, that

began just outside the city wall.” 51 “The boldness of those early people who

undertook to found permanent settlements in

the shifting plains,” wrote H. Frankfort, “had its obverse in anxiety. ”52 Mowinkel maintains that the very foundation of

religious ritual is man’s awareness that “the

world of life and blessedness is completely

surrounded by the world of death and

damnation, the desert, the wasteland, das E-

lend.” 53 The patch of green won from the desert by the waters of life or the circular

clearing in the forest is a haven of refuge, a shelter and sacred vara in which men and animals seek refuge from the savage storms

and equally savage monsters that range

abroad in the vast outer world. 54

Figure 8. Along with the many

replicas of famous places he had

seen on his travels, Hadrian also

built uniquely personal structures such as the so-called Maritime

Theatre in his villa at Tivoli, A.D.

177-138. It was actually a private

retreat for the Emperor, where he

could seal himself off from the

world by pulling in the two-part

pivoted bridges after him. Of

course, this flight to the center of a

circular island was more symbolic

than real, but it demonstrated his

understandable desire to escape

from his world.

At the beginning of the second book of

his cosmology, al-Kazwīnī describes the

first city as a sort of survival out-post, set up by determined cooperative effort on an all

but uninhabitable planet. It is like a “space

station,” hermetically sealed off from the

hostile surroundings, completely self-

contained with gardens and pastures included within its protecting walls, and

fully equipped with mosques, markets, baths,

and those means of aesthetic and intellectual

fulfillment which keep men from becoming a

danger to each other through boredom and

overcrowding. 55 More familiar in Oriental literature is the image of the super-palace in its fortified oasis, whose inhabitants become

over-confident in their safety and end their

days in wicked debauchery as the great and

spacious building goes down in ruins before

the storm. 56 The concept is still with us:

“This desire to dwell on a safe little island,”

writes L. Vax, “is what we call humanism. It

is nothing but the wish to build a city which

will shut out both the sub-human and the

super-human.” Once safe within the walls

we hear “the laugh of the libertines, . . .

meant to give them a feeling of relative

security,” 57 but in reality an expression of an

inescapable fear of the terrors without.

That it is indeed the externi timor that brings cities into existence and keeps them

going is indicated by what is called “the

paradox of the Moslem city,” the paradox

being that while in Moslem civilization the

city is “the indispensable focal point of all

material and spiritual culture,” life within

such a city is completely “anorganic and

disorganized.” 58 What preserves the life of such imperishable communities as Mecca,

Damascus, Jerusalem, and so forth, as

Professor Godbey pointed out long ago, is

the fact that they never lose their original

significance as shrines and asylums, thanks

to the unbroken persistence of the first

conditions under which they were founded,

namely the presence of a real and dangerous

wilderness just outside the gates; the holy

city is forever a place of refuge in a hostile world.59

The obsessive awareness of constant and lurking danger without, which brought

the city into existence, is no less fundamental in the formation of the state; the transcendent importance of the king lies in the conviction

that with him there is safety, he alone can

cope with the powers of death and outer

darkness, meeting them head-on in the yearly

ritual-combat and spending the rest of the

year making his rounds in his perennial task

of imposing divine order on the benighted

outer fringes of the universe. 60

The Royal Progress

In his divine mission of extending the

dominion of light and order the king is

constantly leading his embattled hosts into

dark and unknown regions on an eternal

Royal Progress. The student of the Royal

Progress who confines his attention to the

medieval and modern sources is puzzled to find the practice flourishing in such widely

scattered places as Ireland, Central Africa,

and the islands of the South Pacific, while it is absent on the steppes of Europe and Asia

where one would normally expect to find

migrating kings. 61 Actually the Royal Progress is a world-wide institution of great

antiquity, which turns up in a few backward

corners of the world in later times precisely

because it is only in such places that the

primitive conditions necessary to its

existence survive. If, for example, among the

nineteenth-century Baganda there could be

no capital because “for each king a new

royal enclosure is built,” 62 the same system prevailed in the Old Kingdom of Egypt

where, “paradoxically enough, the capital

was less permanent than the towns in the

provinces, for in principle it served for only a single reign . . . . Until the middle of the

Second Millennium B.C. . . . there was no truly permanent capital in Egypt.” 63 If the Tartars and Mongols built no temples or

cities because their gods traveled about on

wheels, the same held true of the Hittites and Persians before them. 64 In medieval Europe it was the rule for a king to have no capital

but to move continually from place to place

with his whole court in a set ceremonial

Progress which never ceased. Such mobility,

according to the latest and fullest study of the subject, was “the very essence of royal

existence,” prevailing in fact “in any

situation characterized by a typically feudal

structure of government,” that is, in any

Heroic Age or Epic Milieu.65

The Royal Progress ideally followed

the course of the sun, setting out from the

scene of the coronation at the winter solstice and ending up at the same spot exactly a year

from the day of departure; it was so arranged

that each of the major solar festivals would be celebrated at some important shrine along

the way, each such celebration being a minor

repetition of the coronation rite itself.66 The whole operation is astonishingly like that of

Egypt, where the usages of the Royal

Progress are well documented from the

beginning. 67 In Egypt as in the West the king’s purpose in going from place to place

is to be recognized and acclaimed as the

bringer of good things, but it is also very

apparent that along with the festive and

sacral aspects of the royal parousia (and that word establishes significant ties between

eastern and western, Christian and pagan

practices),68 the King’s Progress was meant to dramatize the original seizure and

subduing of the land; it is always the

triumphal procession of a victor, pacifying

the land, receiving formal submission,

suppressing rebellion, rewarding loyalty,

imposing justice and order on the world. 69

The Royal Progress goes back originally,

according to Peyer, to the overrunning of

“conquered farmers and herdsmen” by

“cattle-owning nomadic tribes. Hence,” he

concludes, “the journeys and entertainment

of the ruler ( Herrscherreise und Gastung) appear as the result of the superimposing of

the authority of nomadic warriors over

sedentary agrarians.” 70 This, we have maintained, is exactly the situation attested

by the evidence of the “marked arrow” in

many parts of the world.71 The Royal Progress is a survival of the

Völkerwanderung, an annual repetition of the Landnahme, with the king receiving the ecstatic (often compulsory) acclamations of

the inhabitants, while long lines of cattle and hostages—the children of local chiefs who

might make trouble—were being brought to

the “gisting” places as tribute. 72

Wherever the king went the people were expected to “guest” him and his company for

three nights, though it was common practice

for them to move on after a night or two.

Since the whole existence of royalty was a

brilliant and impressive progress through the

lands, kings were never able to stop the

parade without forfeiting their principal

glory; and so the splendid royal junkets,

arrogant and benevolent, religious and

military in nature, which both overawed

their subjects and alarmed their neighbors,

remained right down until World War I “not

an optional policy but an organic need” for

the rulers of Europe and Asia. 73

In the Saga of Dietrich of Bern, a basic source for the understanding of the way of

kings, ancient and medieval, Asiatic and

European alike, we see the great Attila not

as a destroyer but as a beneficent liberator

moving ever from one stathr to the next,

staying but one night in each and hunting in between. 74 For the Royal Progress is also the Royal Hunt, and animals are expected to

be as compliant as men to the rule of the

Cosmocrator. 75 In the West the king was before everything the Lord of the Forest, his

sylvan sovereignty resting on his

immemorial rights as a hunter. 76 Hence the royal beneficium to obedient subjects was originally the king’s permission to use his

forest for woodcutting and grazing—not for

hunting; 77 and the gradual reduction of the common people to a state of total servility

toward the end of the Middle Ages was

effected largely through the manipulation of

the forest laws, first by the barons and then

by moneyed investors, whose legalistic

legerdemain in dealing with forest laws

resulted, according to Thimme, in the

concept of “property and dominion as we

understand them today.” 78 But originally

there was only one king of the forest, and he was a hunter. 79

On his progress along the King’s

Highway or Royal Road, 80 the monarch spent his nights at castles which were not

proper dwellings but rather guarded supply-

dumps and fortified camping-places, where

one ate, slept, and worked under canopies

with rushes and straw beneath one. “Nearly

all the great Seigneurs,” writes Peyer, “from

the earliest times had no fixed residence, but moved ceaselessly from castrum to

castrum, " where the necessary supplies had been gathered to provide for the guesting of

the lord and the support of his military

plans. 81 The meaning of the well-known derivatives of castrum—camp (castra) and castle—needs no discussion.82 The stopping-places of the Merovingian and

Carolingian rulers was a Pfalz (palatium,

palace), from the old word for a domed tent,

designating also “the celestial vault, the tent of heaven,” that is, the age-old qubba of the nomad chief. 83 The basic idea is never lost from sight as kings continue to feast, sleep,

and sit in state beneath gorgeous tents called variously pavilions, canopies, baldachins,

heavens, and “states”—for the king to sit in

state means in the strict sense of the word to be in his statio or camping-place on the march (cf. fig. 11, p. 117). 84

Trespassing Heroes

Since the business of the royal and

priestly qubba was “to lead the people upon a migration through a totally unknown

country, to select for them the road which

they must travel, and to indicate for them the place of their ultimate settlement, ”85 the problem of possible trespassing becomes a

very serious one for the owner of the tent.

“The laws of tenting,” says the Talmud, “are the most difficult and complicated in all the

written and oral law.” Since the wanderers

are seeking a favored land, they are bound to

find the place inhabited if they ever get there; and in the eyes of the natives, the invaders

can only appear as godless and evil men, the

Wild Huntsmen, the feralis exercitus. “The steppe is the underworld,” wrote A.

Jeremias, “and in oriental tales the hunter is the Man of the Underworld.” 86 The attitude of the settled dwellers in the land toward

their invaders is vividly set forth in a

passage from the early Christian Psalms of Thomas:

I looked into the Abyss and

saw the Evil One

With his Seven Companions

and Twelve attendants;

I saw them putting up his tent

and lighting the fire in it. . . .

I saw their traps and their tents

spread out. . . .

And I saw them lying about,

drinking their stolen wine and

eating their stolen meat. 87

But there is something to be said for the

other side. The red tent moved into lands

only “in sheer desperation, when the very

existence of the . . . tribe was at stake. ”88

Achilles makes it clear at the beginning of

the Iliad that it was not his idea to leave his own domains to plunder other men’s; the

invader is not acting from choice. The

nobility of the Epic Hero is that in his tragic predicament he does what he must, and even

his innocent victims amid their cries of

distress never accuse him of base or

reprehensible behavior. 89 The great folk-

heroes such as Odysseus, Aeneas, Abraham, Siegfried, or Abu Zaid are all homeless

wanderers, never sure of their status or

reception in strange places and often reduced

to dissembling and even to begging in

situations of almost unbearable tension.

Many ancient monarchs sought to relieve the

unpleasant tensions raised by the trespassing

issue by simply making a virtue of necessity,

glorying in their irresistible and hence

divinely sanctioned might and grabbing

everything they could as if by right. 90 Yet even the fiercest of these, such as the

Assyrian monarchs or Genghis Khan,

categorically deny that their dominion is held by force alone, and tirelessly insist that they conquer and rule by an express mandate from

heaven—even the bloody-minded hero of the

Egyptian Cannibal Hymn waves a written document for all to see, “a warrant of

appointment as ‘Great Mighty One’ . . . given

him by Orion, Father of the Gods.” 91

Surprisingly enough, the apparently

academic question of trespassing was of

great concern to the rulers of old. A clear

demonstration of that concern is to be found

in the well-known ritual combat of the Year

Rite, a show-down between two armed

heroes, each claiming to be the legitimate

heir to dominion and accusing his rival of

usurpation and fraud in the long-winded

legalistic stichomachia that should always precede a formal duel. 92 It is the classic showdown between the invader and the

invaded, each accusing the other of trespass:

for if the defenders of a land have the sacred mission of preserving the established order

from the onslaughts of monsters from the

outer darkness, the invaders are led by a

knight in shining armor who finds the land in

possession of the Dragon, the Lord of

Misrule, from whose primordial

misgovernment it is his sacred duty to deliver it. 93 The theme has recently been studied by J. Trumpf, who notes that the

foundation of an ancient city can never

proceed in peace and order until the local

dragon, who has misruled and oppressed the

land from time immemorial, is got out of the

way. Trumpf duly observes (as we also have

done) that the nomads of the steppes, that is, the normal invaders, refuse to acknowledge

the humanity of an enemy but can conceive of

any opposition to themselves only as some

form of monstrous perversion, the

annihilation of which is a holy calling. 94

Thus they clear themselves of the charge of

trespassing.

But just who is the trespasser? By what

right do the prior inhabitants of the land

possess it? After all, the Trojans had sacked

as many cities and stolen as many cattle as

the Achaeans who invaded them. In the old

bestiaries it is the animals who claim prior occupancy and accuse the human race of

trespassing upon the earth; the notable

treatise on the theme by the “Chaste Brethren

of Basra” depicts all the animals assembled

before the throne of Solomon to sue the

human race for trespassing—they complain

that men have driven them from their

homelands and have continued to pursue

them even into the deserts without any

vestige of legal right, like Shakespeare’s

banished nobility who go to the woods to act

like “mere usurpers, tyrants, and what’s

worse, to fright the animals, and to kill them up in their assign’d and native dwelling-places.” 95

Although practically any nomad chief

who had both people and cattle at his back

considered himself to be legitimate,96 all such people, as Tacitus observed, are liable

to meet their nemesis in others of their kind

with which occasional collisions are inevitable.97 The result is a showdown, a trial of arms in the chivalric or horse-rider’s manner, which no true ruler can escape.98

The code of chivalry is not a settlement

worked out between farmers and nomad

warriors, between whom there is no real

understanding or even communication, but

rather a system of settling the touchy question of possession between parties neither of

whose claims will stand too close an

examination. 99 The claims of brute force are denied in favor of the idea that combat itself, if attended by the proper formalities, is a

form of divination which clearly proclaims

the will of heaven in the assignment of

property. 100 Furthermore, what is won by combat must be maintained by combat, and

the proud and truculent mottoes of heraldry

were a standing invitation to trial at arms. A noble was required and expected to invite

assault, according to the rules of chivalry,

“because everyone seeks distinction, one

mark of which is to offend fearlessly.” “An

insult,” writes F. R. Bryson, commenting on

this, “was regarded as causing one of the

two parties to lose honor,” thereby forcing

him to fight to get it back. 101 The prince who hesitated to take issue when another set foot

on his lands vi et armis (“by force and by arms,” still the official definition of

trespassing) actually forfeited his right to

their possession,102 as did the German rulers after the death of Charles the Bald who, by

failing to expel poaching barons from their

forest lands, forfeited the legal claim on

those lands to the barons.103

The Battle for the Tent

The combat between chiefs was no

mere brawl but a splendid and formal affair,

with time, place, and procedure stipulated ahead of time. Whether it was a set battle

between Pharaoh and an invading desert

chief,104 or a ritual chariot race between rival Vedic princes, 105 or a set-to between Asiatic war lords, played like a game of

chess, 106 or the elaborately ordered duels of the sagas or jousts of the Middle Ages, it

was understood that the winner was to take

all, usually including the erstwhile loyal

retainers of the loser. 107 The correct and formal method of announcing one’s intention

of occupying a land was by the pitching of a

red tent upon it, such a tent proclaiming the

owner’s “unique position as universal ruler

—a superman and a cosmic being, according

to the views of the ancients.” 108 To the many examples given by Morgenstern we might

add that Adam in the beginning, according to

an old and widespread tradition, took

possession of the world as he journeyed

through it by setting up his red leather tent wherever he went. 109 How old the tradition may really be can be surmised from a

prehistoric Egyptian festival in which the

Besitzergreifung des Landes, according to W. Helck, was dramatized by the setting up

of red and white tents representing the two

worlds in conflict. 110 Everywhere in the ancient world the chief’s banner and tent

served together and interchangeably as his

flag of defiance wherever he went. 111 The setting up of the tent of the Ark at Gilgal was a formal Landnahme, according to von

Rad;112 and among the Arabs “to pitch one’s tent on strange or disputed ground was a

deed of honor. ”113 The sacred tent and the royal tent when they are not one and the same

are always pitched side by side, as

Morgenstern explains, pointing out that the

tent of inspiration makes it possible for “an

entire people [to] wander about in a strange

and unknown country with reasonable assurance, and . . . at last find its proper

place for resettlement.” 114 “The tent of the Lord will not be replaced by a permanent

tent,” wrote the first of the Christian

Doctors, “until the final combat when the

Lord has put all his enemies beneath his feet

and bound the dragon. ”115 The early sectaries of the desert, as they raise the tent of defiance to the hosts of Evil, view their

own tents as the camp of the hosts of heaven

ready to dispute for the possession of the

earth.116

When Alexander had seized the tent of

Darius he had achieved his final military

victory, for by that act, following an ageless tradition, all the Great King’s holdings were

formally transferred to him. 117 And when Eumenes after the death of Alexander “found

it useful to carry with him as a mascot

Alexander’s tent, which he could represent

as still inhabited by his great master’s spirit,” he was really announcing to the

world that the universal empire was now

his. 118 The Greeks need not have borrowed the chivalric pattern from the Orient, for

already in the Iliad Poseidon, “the owner of the earth,” as both his name and his epithet,

Gaie-ochos, show him to be, 119 rushes into the council of the gods in great alarm crying: O Father Zeus, what mortal upon the

boundless earth will ever again credit

the gods with intelligence or ability?

Haven’t you seen how these long-haired

Greeks have actually built a wall

around their ships and dug a ditch,

without having paid for the privilege by

appropriate offerings of submission to

us? The fame and honor of that deed

will spread as far as the sun shines,

while all that Phoebus Apollo and I

have won in fair combat from the hero Laomedon [i.e., the original holder of

Ilium] will be forfeited.

The whole concept of chivalry is

embraced in those lines.120

Of course the royal tent is surrounded

by a camp. At the primordial battle for the

possession of the world the Titans camped

on Mount Ortys while over against them on

Mount Olympus stood the camp of the

gods.121 In the days before Rome the kings of the Veii, Volsci, Aequi, and other tribes used to challenge each other by camping on each

other’s lands, the hosts being arranged aequo campo conlatisque signis (on a level plain with standards joined together), in the best

Oriental manner, with the avowed intention

of carrying off cattle and everything else

unless stopped.122 When the Romans joined in the game their king would cast a spear into

the enemy’s land “to claim a place for their tents” ( ut castris locum caperent), with a formal invitation to the owners to submit or

fight. 123 In northern and eastern Europe where “the lords of the land established their dominion by open combat,” we have the

stirring picture of two imperial tents,

landtioldr, pitched in groves on either side of a fair field, each surrounded by the tents

of its retainers um stathinn, as the mobile base from which the land was to be seized

and governed. By herald and trumpet the two

rulers challenge each other to a trial of arms and fight according to strict and formal

rules.124 Almost a thousand years later we find the same sport in the great tournament of Calais. “Three vermillion-coloured

pavilions were pitched near the appointed

place for the lists,” Froissart reports, “and

before each were suspended two shields,

one for peace and one for war. . . . Any who

desired to perform a deed of arms was required to touch one or both of these

shields.” Hearing of the challenge on the

disputed soil of Calais, the nobility of

England “said they would be blameworthy if

they did not cross the sea,” which they did in large numbers—for not to accept a challenge

is as ignoble as not to give one. “Sir John

Holland was the first who sent his squire to

touch the war-target of Sir Boucicault who

instantly issued from his tent completely

armed,” and the tournament was on. The

procedure was faithfully repeated for all the

days of the affair; an English knight would

touch the “war-shield” of a French lord

sitting fully armed and out of sight in his tent, waiting to rush forth with great fury at the

first hint of a challenge. 125

Even more puerile than such antics was

the ritual attack on the tent itself. Since set combat was forbidden after sundown, the

wee small hours were reserved for the standard attack on the rival’s tent, a vital

maneuver, since once the tent had fallen the

enemy’s morale, and often his resistance,

was broken. 126 A particularly realistic version is the sequel to the brutal trespassing of the Adversary in the Psalm of Thomas

mentioned above: the issue was settled when

the true Lord burst on the scene, “pulled up

their tent and threw it over on to the ground, kicked out their fire, tore open their nets and set free all the captive birds in them.” 127 The ultimate in heroic gestures for the Arab was

a night-raid on the tent of a chief: “They

suddenly knock down the principal tent-

poles,” Burckhardt reported 130 years ago,

“and whilst the surprised people are striving

to disengage themselves, . . . the cattle [are]

driven off by the assailants,” though the main purpose is to get not cattle but honor. 128

Among the nomads the overthrow of a man’s

tent signifies the dissolution of his fortunes, for his whole existence centers around the

main pole of his tent. 129 When Crum, the Great Khan of the Bulgars, made a night-raid

on the tent of the Emperor Nicephorus, he

made a drinking-cup of his rival’s skull to

commemorate the exploit. 130 The tent-raid is by no means limited to the East. Froissart

tells how Lord James Douglas rode into the

English camp by night, “galloped to the

King’s tent, and cut two or three of its cords, crying at the same time, ‘Douglas! Douglas

forever!’” Fauquement did the same thing in

the Duke of Normandy’s camp, “cutting

down tents and pavilions, and then, seeing

that it was time, collecting his people and

retreating most handsomely.” 131

Trumpf is puzzled by the peculiar rite

with which the oldest Greek founding

festival, the Septrion, commemorated

Apollo’s victory over the Python and the

founding of the world-center at Delphi. What is peculiar is that there is no dragon in the

rite, but that should not seem strange since

Trumpf himself has the acumen to notice that

Pytho the dragon simply represents the

original inhabitants of the land. Instead of a dragon-fight there is a troupe of men bearing

torches and led by a youth representing

Apollo, who in the dead of night steal up in

perfect silence on a tent or reed booth;

suddenly they throw their torches into the

tent, setting it afire, overturn a table that

stands in it, and then run away like mad

without looking back. 132 An odd type of dragon-fight, to be sure, but one whose

significance should be clear by now; it is

particularly interesting because of its great

antiquity.

Alternatives to Fighting: Toll and

Taxing

Let us recall that what so alarmed Poseidon the landowner at the sight of a

strange camp on his shores was the failure of

the campers to make proper payment for the

privilege of setting up on his land. They

were digging in, and unless immediately

called to account would cause the owners to

lose both face and property with nothing but

glory for themselves—trespassers are not

trespassers if they can get away with it.

Everywhere certain allowance is made for

campers who are merely passing through a

country; all that is demanded of them is good

behavior and a three-day time limit.133 But those who frequented a land for long or

regular periods were required to pay tolls

and purchase safe-conduct to keep things

from getting out of hand.

The derivation of the word toll is very doubtful, but on one thing all the authorities are agreed, that it is derived from Late Latin

tolonium, meaning a toll-booth or tent. Toll is defined as “payment exacted . . . by virtue of sovereignty or lordship . . . for permission to pass somewhere.” Specifically it is “a

charge for the privilege of bringing goods for sale to a market or fair, or setting up a stall. .

. . It can only be claimed by a special grant

from the Crown.” It was collected at a toll-

booth, “formerly, a temporary shed erected

at a market, etc., for payment of tolls . . . a booth, stall, or office at which tolls are

collected.” 134 Wherever the merchants pass, even on the sands of the Gobi desert, the tent of the toll-collector awaits them. 135 The great fairs of Europe were tent-cities,

temporary camps set up yearly on the king’s

land, where foreigners were allowed for a

set period to camp and set up their booths. 136

The two things to notice about toll are (1) that the word always goes back to a tent or

booth of some kind—which makes one

wonder whether it might not once have meant

“tent-money” (Danish told “toll,” teld

“tent”), 137 and (2) that it is a token payment only, given in recognition of sovereignty or

lordship and never as a business

arrangement between equals; it does not

cover damages nor defray expenses but

simply recognizes ownership by a

prescribed ritual and solicits as a privilege

permission to camp on another’s land at a

designated spot and for a limited and

specified period of time.

A tax, like a toll, is payment for

temporary occupation of another’s land, with

the difference that the occupation in this case lasts for a whole year, at the end of which a

new tax must be paid. The oldest taxes on

record are those tributes of the produce of

the land (a tithe or a fifth), which were

brought to the designated collection centers,

the local shrines of the god who owned the

land, as “rent paid for the use of the land.” In making the collection and spending it in

pious works the king was the god’s agent and

the priests were his assistants.138 Thus the earliest temple “functioned actually as the

manor-house on an estate. ”139 Since as countless hymns inform us, God owns the

earth and all that is in it, any payments made by men to him are the purest token payments,

given not because he needs them but as a

gesture acknowledging his ownership. That

is why failure to pay even a trivial tax calls forth quick and savage reprisals which are

out of all proportion to the money involved

but represent the correct official reaction to an act of open defiance. 140

For refusal to pay implies willingness

to fight and vice versa. From the earliest

times a king might live in peace with another

by paying him socage, that is, “money rent . .

. not burdened with any military service,”

i.e., money paid to avoid fighting. 141 When Sir Robert Knolles asked the Duke of

Picardy, “How much will you pay us in

ready money for all this country if we will

not despoil it?” he was not cynically selling

the Duke “protection,” since the latter was

expected to meet in joyful combat any who

came to despoil his lands. 142 As explained in the Oxford English Dictionary, the word tax in its many contexts always retains the basic

idea of a charge brought against an intruder;

to be taxed always implies an element of

trespass, and the paying of a tax always has

the flavor of appeasement. The only thing

sure about the root meaning of the word

according to Skeat is that it signifies “to

touch” or tag, suggesting to the ingenuous

mind a possible connection between being

taxed and being tagged: once one’s war-

shield has been touched one must choose

between settling with the challenger by

meeting him in arms or by giving him a token of submission for the luxury of remaining in

one’s possessions without a fight. 143

The paying of tolls and taxes was not a

declaration of loyalty to the recipient and his way of life, but a bid to be free of both. The zeal with which the peasants of Europe

clamored to have the “irksome personal

services” including the picturesque

performances of the droit de gite converted into a money tax or cash payment, 144 the eagerness of “the wealthy franklin [to pay]

money rather than be dubbed a knight,” and

the insistence even of the lesser nobility on

paying socage to enjoy “freedom from

scutage,” i.e., the obligation of chivalry, 145

all express the basic idea of the money-tax

as a settlement defining the limits of

obligation beyond which the payer is free.146

No such area of personal freedom was

allowed by the mystique of feudalism, which

was a sacred covenant of total commitment. 147 Likewise toll is paid by strangers in a country not as an act of fealty, but for the express purpose of remaining

strangers without being considered enemies

or trespassers. The theory that one was taxed

to support the strong arm of the nobility in

return for its protection against attackers

from without was a late and contrived one

that effaced the original significance of the

tax as an escape from feudal obligations.148

The Old Order Remaineth

But feudalism has ever been tenacious

of its holdings and with the assistance of the lawyer and the priest has managed to hold its

own in the most adverse circumstances. Far

from fading into the past, “absolute

monarchies,” as H. Kohn puts it, “were the

pacemakers of modern nationalism.” 149 Far

from presenting a gradual unfolding of human liberties, the passing of the Middle Ages

brings only their progressive curtailment as

the seizure of the common forest right by the

“ungezügelte[n] Jagdlust der Machtigen” (the

unbridled passion of the mighty for hunting)

is succeeded by the acquisition of those

rights by wealthy commoners who finally

exclude the public from the forest

altogether.150 At the end of the Middle Ages Geoffrey Tête-Noire was considered

something of a monster because “none dared

ride over his lands”; but it took the modern

free world to come up with the absolute

dominion of the No Trespassing sign. 151 The survival of the feudal or chivalric way of

life into modern times can be illustrated by

Froissart’s Chronicle, that “complete body of the antiquities of the 14th century,” in

which the king commands respect and loyalty

only to that degree to which he risks his

person in single combat and expends the devoted energies of his people in tireless

military campaigning, 152 where the nobility live frankly by pillage, ever “seeking

adventures . . . for by all means, allowed by

the laws, of arms, every man ought to molest

his enemy,” 153 where the great prelates of the church raided each other’s domains in the

perennial manner of the war lords of the

steppes.154 A leading role is played by the terrible free companies, who played exactly

the same game as the nobility and “made war

on every man that was worth robbing. ”155

Even the common people when they arose in

their might to shake off the oppressor

operated in the accepted manner, organizing

themselves into bannered companies and

placing (by force if necessary) those of

noble birth at their head, impatient of the

lord who sat peacefully at home, but willing

to follow to the death any noble who would

lead them to deeds of glory and rapine on others’ lands. 156 In short, all classes aspire to the same glory and think of success in the

same terms, because it never occurs to them

that there might be any other standard of

achievement. (Even our own society remains

hypnotized by the same goals that drew

Froissart’s “perfect prince,” Gaston de Foix,

who “loved earnestly the things he ought to

love,” namely gold, food, sports, shows,

“arms and amours” and above all a

successful business deal.)157 The cities were no exception, but “during the late Middle

Ages . . . grew less democratic and took on

more of the coloring of their aristocratic

ambience. ”158 They achieved independence only to place themselves under the great war

lords or exalt their own leading citizens to

noble rank as they sent formal challenges to

each other and raided each other’s

possessions in the best chivalric manner.159

The long-debated question of whether European cities were founded primarily for

protection or for trade ended with a split

decision,160 since the two advantages are inseparable and at any rate seem to yield

priority to religion, for early markets and

towns grew out of “seasonal meetings of

hunters” devoted to ancient religious

observances. 161 But whether it began as a shrine, market, or fortified place of refuge,

the city always starts out as a camp, to judge by the root meanings of the various words

for it: civitas from *kei-, “camp,” Stadt from Old German stedir, “Landungsplatz”; Statt (our state) from statio, a stopping-place on the march; burg from phyrkos, the hastily built fence surrounding a fortified camp

( town refers to the same fence, as does the Slavic gorod). 162 The Arabic mahalla is also a stopping-place on the march, and it

has been shown that madina, long thought to

come from din, a place of judgment, is to be related to maidan, a camp-ground or

jousting-field. 163

The rising cities of the Middle Ages

naturally resented the archaic claims and

method of the lords in their castles, but they resented them out of envy as they aspired to

the same rights and privileges. Gastrecht, Schutzzoll, and Stapelrecht were urban versions of tenting-rights, toll, and taxing

respectively, and as such were administered

with a severity that only the most tyrannical

baron would have risked. The cities offered

Pfahlbürgertum or shanty-town citizenship to those who deserted their lords to settle in tent-cities outside the city walls, where they continued to pay a tax for camping on the

city’s land. 164 City merchants complained loudly against the onerous toll charger of the barons even while they levied a high

Schutzzoll on goods passing through their

own territories. 165 And while the droit de gite was steadily whittled away for the king, the cities used their Gastrecht and

Stapelrecht to forbid transients to acquire property or engage in any business while in

the city. 166 What the cities most resented was the baronial courts of law, yet whenever they

gained power, the leading property-owners

of the town held a tight monopoly on all

judicial offices. 167 Stadtluft macht frei (the city air makes one free) not only by offering

shelter and anonymity to the refugee, but no

less by opening the doors of aggrandizement

and even nobility to the citizen.

The Rights of Man

But what of human rights, the rights of

man? Do they not break away at last from the

old ideology? They do not. They are a

product of the Enlightenment, which put

nature in the place of God and made man a child not of heaven but of earth. Naturalism

and Humanism find man’s origin in the earth

and its elements: it is as a literal

excrescence of the planet that mankind has an

inalienable right to its substance and its

living-space. 168 Baconian science, the founding fathers, French revolutionaries,

Physiocrats, English liberals, pragmatic

philosophers and educationists, free-

enterprising capitalists and Marxists all see

eye to eye on one basic point and share with

each other and the ancient lords of the

steppes the fundamental gospel of One

World: it is here below in “the things of this world” that a man must seek his fulfillment.

Instead of putting an end to the wild dreams

of Nimrod, the mad hunter of old who

aspired to bring all creatures under his sway

and in the best chivalric manner challenged

God to a duel for possession of the world, 169

modern scientific thinking tends to confirm man’s forlorn hope of seizing the earth for

himself. 170

The monarchs of the past in their search

for permanent tenure went to spectacular

extremes to convince themselves and the

public that it was their calling to reign here below as Lords of Eternity in the Garden of

Delights: from prehistoric Egypt to modern

England the Master of the King’s Tents and

Revels has exerted himself to present to the

eyes of men majesty benignly reclining in a

garden bower as he presides over a feast of

abundance to which all the world is

invited.171 This royal mummery was the greatest tent-show on earth, according to

Alföldi,172 and it was staged all over the ancient world in rites which “represent[ed] a

harmony between man and the divine which

is beyond our boldest dreams.” 173 And yet the great garden party soon becomes a great

bore, as king and caliph discover in countless popular tales and legends; this

world can offer but a peep-show paradise

after all. The whole thing, aside from being

enormously expensive, is too strenuous and

contrived for real delight—it is vanity fair,

the tent-city from which the robber Pilgrim is only too glad to escape even with empty

pockets, provided, of course, that he has

some other world, some New Jerusalem, to

escape to.174

The Other Nomads

The yearning for such a world and the

faith in its existence, or even the mere

possibility of its existence, has always

offered an alternative to the heavy-handed

warrior’s solution to the problem of survival

in a hostile world. Pilgrims, like all nomads, have a deep distrust of anything that might tie

them down or hamper their freedom of movement. 175 The city especially, designed to make man forget the marginal and nomadic

nature of life on earth and hence lose sight of the distant Celestial City, is to the pious

pilgrim an object of loathing and

suspicion. 176 Not only do the early Jews and Christians think of themselves as das

wandernde Gottesvolk (the wandering

people of God), 177 and not only does the dogmatic constitution of the church (1964)

adopt for Roman Catholics the surprising

title of “The Wayfaring Church,” 178 but obsession with the idea of life as a

pilgrimage is no less conspicuous in Islam,

the religions of the Far East, and classical

antiquity—was there ever a more Passionate

Pilgrim than Pindar? How do the pilgrim

bands make out with the jealous, suspicious,

and insecure lords of the earth?

In rendering to Caesar what was

Caesar’s (cf. Matthew 22:21), the early Christian was not recognizing divine

sovereignty but buying his way out; a sharp

distinction was made between paying Caesar

tax-money that was his (and there is no

question of excessive taxation since what Caesar owns is nothing less than the orbis terrarum itself), and giving him the homage of a pinch of incense. The latter act was an

acknowledgment of divinity, and a good

Christian died sooner than make the

concession, while the former was merely a

recognition of ownership. The early

Christians were urged to “make . . . friends

of the mammon of unrighteousness” (Luke

16:9) as the best way to be rid of him,

paying quickly and gladly whatever fees the

masters of the earth imposed on them.179

Then they went their way, resolutely refusing

to own lands or houses of their own which,

they felt, would encumber them with worldly

obligations and vitiate their status as strangers and pilgrims. 180

It is understandable that the lords

temporal and spiritual looked upon popular

pilgrimages as dangerous and unnecessary.

For the pilgrim is unattached, with a

knowing and superior sort of aloofness

inherited from the sectaries of the desert, that cool detachment that has ever brought down

upon the heads of the Jews the baffled wrath

and fury of the lords of the earth. For unless the feudal mystique with appurtenances is

taken seriously, it becomes high comedy and

its authority collapses. What more deadly

threat to the whole system than refusal to

enter into the spirit of the thing? And

pilgrims do refuse; they are not to be bought

off, and though they are sometimes skillful at procuring safe-conducts for themselves in

spite of the determined efforts of the lords of the land to deny them all freedom of

movement, such passports are, like the payment of tolls, a declaration not of

allegiance but of independence.181

The Crusades were a grandiose attempt

to combine the two types of nomadism. It

was the great lords themselves who after

bringing economic, political, and moral

collapse on Europe by their violent and

irresponsible ways offered to lead the

people of the West back to the Holy City,182

and when they got there affected to establish

the perfect model of feudalism in the Assizes

of Jerusalem. 183 In this document we have the supreme attempt of men of violence to

put the stamp of holiness on their

possessions, enlisting the awful sanctions of

religion to secure for themselves the

holdings which they had seized from each

other in total disregard of any right, and

imposing an eternal and inviolable stability

upon an order established by wild and

tumultuous brawling. In the Crusades the whole legal and ecclesiastical fiction of

feudalism, laboriously contrived and

stunningly staged, soon degenerated into a

sordid free-for-all in which those who

sought to possess this world and the other at

once, wearing the armor of conquest beneath

the sacrosanct robes of unworldly pilgrims,

ended up possessing neither. 184

The Return to Outer Space

Philosophy today is much concerned

with the feelings of loneliness and insecurity that beset modern man. He is depicted as a

displaced person, allergic to his

environment, adapted “by at least five

hundred million years of vertebrate

evolution” to one type of life, but forced to

settle for an entirely different one. 185 Man is so far from home, indeed, that biologists

profess themselves at a loss to discover to just what type of environment he is really

suited.186 In his present parlous state he behaves as harassed and insecure animals

do, as many studies are now discovering. 187

We find in both human and animal

communities two fundamental types of social

hierarchy, an “absolute hierarchy,”

represented by the now-classic pecking-

orders, and a “territorial hierarchy,” in

which men and beasts alike possess and

defend given territories according to strict

and formal rules. A creature’s territory is

“not so much . . . a solid area as . . . a

number of places,” which the owner visits in

regular rounds; if in his rounds he discovers

that an alien has invaded any part of his

territory the owner is under obligation to

fight or submit as a vassal to the

aggressor. 188 At once the heroic feudal pattern springs to mind; and it is reinforced

by the important rule that these highly formal hierarchies of status and possession come

into existence only when the animals are all

under pressure, that is, where optimum living

conditions no longer prevail due to

overcrowding or other factors, or in other

words, where there has been a “Fall,” the

creature having been forced out of its

original paradise. 189

Strangely enough, the idea now being

put forth by scientists of a long human

preexistence in a world quite different from

the one in which man now finds himself is

basic in the early Jewish190 and Christian,191

as well as Oriental192 and Platonic thinking, 193 all of which have a strongly nostalgic other-worldly orientation. Science

and religion now join philosophy in asking,

“Why does man feel himself a stranger in the

world of nature?” It is not only the desperate hero of the epic who feels out of place; even

the easy-living Victorian romantic resents his earthly environment and hints at his kinship

with a higher world. 194 If this is indeed our only home, as the prevailing philosophy

teaches, if this is the only world we have

ever known, and if conditions have been

constant enough to allow “five hundred

million years” of survival without a break,

why are we perpetually ill at ease in our

environment instead of being beautifully

adapted to it? Why are we constantly beset

by yearnings for paradise?195 And why do we look upon those who claim to be happily

at home in the present setting as either sick

souls, cretins, or hypocrites? 196

It is a significant thing that those

societies which have most emphatically

renounced any belief in another world have

been the most eager in the exploration of

space. It would seem that as soon as men

become convinced that their whole existence

is to be limited to this planet they begin to feel an urge to get away from it, yearning

like the Greeks with a strange pothos for the deliverance of great distances and spaces, no

matter to what unknown doom it might lead

them.197 The re discovery of outer space in our time puts us in much the same position as

our ancestors on the eve of the great

Völkerwanderung. 198 Our first reaction has been the same as theirs: in his “monstrous

deracinement,” a Dutch philosopher

comments, “man has surrounded himself with

a protective cocoon against reality.” 199 The conquest of the earth by the closed car and

its extension, the mobile home—a

streamlined, hermetically sealed capsule,

air-conditioned against the rude elements

and totally insulated from any contaminating

contact with mother earth—is the expression

of an ideal which is most fully realized in jet transportation, combining the snug security

of a private world with an exhilarating sense of enterprise and power, and offering in

incongruous combination the supreme

satisfaction of relaxing in embryonic

coziness while moving with incredible and

effortless speed through an almost perfect

vacuum. 200

The mobile tents of the ancients were no

contemptible step toward the achievement of

this ideal. Ancient and modern travelers do

not know which to admire the more in the

dwellings of felt and goat’s-hair, the skill

with which they are transported from place

to place or the efficiency with which they

meet every challenge of the elements. By

their ingenious insulation and mobility these

dwellings of the highest and lowest mortals

have made it possible for their owners to

survive in deadly outer spaces.

Conclusion

If it comes as a surprise to learn that the clothes we wear today were designed

thousands of years ago for the comfort of

riders on the windy steppes of Asia, 201 one is no less bemused at the thought that our

basic political philosophy comes from the

same world. Our storm-driven ancestors met

the challenge of their predicament with two

solutions: the one sought to make the earth a

permanent home and possess it wholly; the

other to move on to some happier home,

whatever and wherever that might be. The

one philosophy is based on the firm belief

that this is our only world, the other on the

equally convincing and far more easily

demonstrable proposition that we are

transients who “here have no abiding

kingdom.” 202 The paying of tolls and taxes has made it possible for the two ideologies

to coexist in the world; it is an arrangement

by which each side humors the other: the

payer of taxes concedes to the recipient the right to imagine himself as the owner of the

earth, while the other in return for this

recognition allows his client the luxury of

imagining himself the citizen of another

world. The one while ceaselessly ranging

abroad in the earth thinks of himself as lord

of an immovable possession, while the other,

tied to his patch of glebe or dingy workshop,

thinks of himself as a courser through the

endless expanses of heaven. The common

symbol of both, the sign both of possession

and of wandering, is the tent.

Living in an atmosphere of emergency

and uncertainty, the state has always been

obliged to tax to preserve its identity. Taxes are viewed by those who are asked to pay

the most as a personal insult and an affront to the sacredness of property. That is exactly

what they are, and what they were originally

meant to be. An ancient tax-notice, an

imperious tap on the shield, was nothing less than an invitation to a sojourner in a land to justify his presence there either by satisfying the claims of the owner to recognition or by

meeting him in open combat for possession.

We may deplore taxes, but we may not resent

them.

Notes

This article was originally published

in Western Political Quarterly 19/4 (1966): 599-630.

Footnotes

^1. Hector M. Chadwick, The Heroic Age (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

1912), and Hector M. Chadwick and Nora

K. Chadwick, The Growth of Literature

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

1932). The situation was suggested by Hugo

Winckler, “Geschichte und Geographie,” in Eberhard Schrader, Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament, 3d ed. (Berlin: Reuther and Reichard, 1903), 4.

^2. Alfred O. Haldar, The Notion of the Desert in Sumero-Accadian and West-Semitic

Religions (Uppsala: Lundequist, 1950), 29; in every case the land is turned into a desert, ibid., 22, 26-29. The great violence of the

winds at the time of the Flood is indicated in fragments of the Gilgamesh Epic, Tab. V,

12-20; Alexander Heidel, The Gilgamesh

Epic and Old Testament Parallels (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946), 48-49;

cf. W. G. Lambert, “New Light on the

Babylonian Flood,” Journal of Semitic

Studies 5 (1960): 117-18, and “A New Look at the Babylonian Background of Genesis,”

Journal of Theological Studies 16 (1965): 296. Johannes B. Bauer, “Der priesterliche

Schöpfungshymnus in Gen. 1,”

Theologische Zeitschrift 20 (1964): 3, notes that the wind which blows over the waters in

Genesis 8:1 is really a Gottessturm,

gewaltiger Sturm (divine storm, a powerful storm). Cf. Pyramid Texts (PT) 298b-c,

326d, and Hesiod, Theogony 654-714.

Many later sources are cited in Robert

Eisler, Iēsous Basileus ou Basileusas, 2

vols. (Heidelberg: Winter, 1929-30), 2:107-

9, 113, 626-28. The great wind is mentioned

in Jubilees 10:26, and E. A. Wallis Budge, tr., The Chronography of Gregory Abû’l

Faraj, the Son of Aaron, the Hebrew

Physician, Commonly Known as Bar

Hebraeus, 2 vols. (Oxford: Oxford

University Press, 1932), 1:8; and there are

interesting Arabic accounts in Rosa Klinke-

Rosenberger, ed., Das Götzenbuch: Kitâb

al-Aṣnâm des Ibn al-Kalbî (Leipzig:

Winterthur, 1941), 58, and Ferdinand

Wüstenfeld, “Die älteste ägyptische

Geschichte nach den Zäuber- und

Wundererzählungen der Araber,” Orient und

Occident 1 (1862): 331. For early Christian references, see Eusebius, Chronicon

(Chronicle) I, 4, in PG 19:116; Epiphanius, Adversus Haereses (Against Heresies) I, 1,

5, in PG 41:184; Pseudo-Melito, in J. C. T.

Otto, Corpus Apologetarum Christianorum

Saeculi Secundi, 9 vols. (Jena: Mauke, 1872), 9:510-11; cf. T. Francis Glasson,

“Water, Wind and Fire (Luke III. 16) and

Orphic Initiation,” New Testament Studies 3

(1956): 69-71.

^3. E. Demougeout, “Variations climatiques et invasion,” Revue historique 233 (1965): 11.

In the twelfth century B.C. the island of

Cyprus was covered by wind-driven sand,

ibid., 8, and what classical writers call the

great flooding of the northlands in the

second century A.D. was accompanied by

heavy deposition of such sands, ibid., 17-18.

Today it is maintained that the deserts of the Near East and the Sahara itself were

produced largely through human agency

within historic times; Henri Lhote, Vanished Civilizations, ed. Edward Bacon (New

York: McGraw-Hill, 1963), 12-32.

^4. Samuel N. Kramer, “New Light on the Early History of the Ancient Near East,” AJA 52

(1948): 159.

^5. For Horus and his royal counterparts, see PT

393a-414c, 298a-299b, 308a-312a, 261, and

so forth; J. Zandee, “Seth als Sturmgott,”

Zeitschrift für ägyptische Sprache 90

(1962): 144-56; Pierre Montet, Le drame

d’Avaris (Paris: Geuthner, 1941), 87-88; for the famous “Cannibal Hymn,” see Raymond

O. Faulkner, “The ‘Cannibal Hymn’ from

the Pyramid Texts,” JEA 10 (1924): 97-103.

The oldest shrine of Egypt was the

“Thunderbolt-city” founded by the Storm-

god, whose high priest was “the Warrior,”

Gerald A. Wainwright, “The Bull Standards

of Egypt,” JEA 19 (1933): 46-47. “This storm was the raging of Ra at the thunder-cloud,” and so forth, E. A. Wallis Budge,

The Papyrus of Ani, 3 vols. (New York: Putnam, 1913), 2:384-85. Enlil, Anu, and

Ningirsu came into Mesopotamia as lords of

the storm; Thorkild Jacobsen, “Primitive

Democracy in Ancient Mesopotamia,” in

Henri Frankfort et al., Before Philosophy

(New York: Penguin, 1951), 147, 150, 153;

see also Marduk, R. Labat, Le Poème

babylonien de la Création (Paris: Maisonneuve, 1935), 33-34. The earthly

king is “the storm-wind of battles,” Bruno

Meissner, Die babylonisch-assyrische

Literatur (Wildpark-Potsdam: Athenaion, 1927), 39, and aspires “to shine as Lord in

the storm,” M. Witzel, “Zu den Enmerkar-

Dichtungen,” Orientalia 18 (1949): 276.

Jürgen Smolian, “Kultischer Hintergrund bei

Wagenrennen,” Zeitschrift für Religions-

und Geistesgeschichte 17 (1965): 264-65.

The Greek Zeus is nephelegeretes, lord of thunder-storms; Martin P. Nilsson,

Griechische Feste (Leipzig: Teubner, 1906), 2-3; Arthur B. Cook, Zeus, 3 vols.

(Cambridge: University Press, 1925), 2:851,

830-58. On Apollo, the migrating hero,

Wernicke, “Apollon,” in RE 2:20-21; as storm-god, J. Rendel Harris, “Apollo at the

Back of the North Wind,” Journal of

Hellenic Studies 45 (1925): 229-42; on Hermes as such, Wilhelm H. Roscher,

“Hermes als Wind- und Luftgott,” in

Wilhelm H. Roscher, ed., Ausführliches

Lexikon der griechischen und römischen Mythologie, 7 vols. (Hildesheim: Olms, 1965), 1:2:2360-62; and on Herakles,

Bernhard Schweitzer, Herakles (Tübingen: Mohr, 1922), 47-48. For the Hittite Teshub,

Oliver R. Gurney, The Hittites (New York: Penguin, 1952), 192-94. “Der Wettergott

von Ḫalab” dominates the entire Near East,

see Horst Klengel, “Der Wettergott von

Ḫalab,” Journal of Cuneiform Studies 19

(1965): 87-93. The insignia of the chief

Celtic god were the wheel, thunderbolt, and

hammer; Carl Clemen, Religionsgeschichte

Europas, 2 vols. (Heidelberg: Winter, 1926) 1:319-23. Othinn as successor to Thor is

both a wanderer and a storm-god; Cornelius

P. Tiele, Tiele-Söderbloms Kompendium der

Religionsgeschichte, 5th ed. (Berlin: Grabow, 1920), 480-82; Schweitzer,

Herakles, 86. Even Alexander as a world-conquerer is Lord of the Storm, his birth

being announced by supernatural thunder

and lightning; Pseudo-Callisthenes, Life of Alexander I, 12, in Karl Müller, ed., The

Fragments of the Lost Historians of Alexander the Great (Chicago: Ares, 1979).

In Hebrew tradition “Geisteswind” and the

“Heere des Himmels” appear on the scene

together, recalling actual prehistoric

upheavals; Klaus Koch, “Wort und Einheit

des Schöpfergottes in Memphis und

Jerusalem,” Zeitschrift für Theologie und

Kirche 62 (1965-66): 276.

^6. Sir Dudley Stamp, “Man and His Environment,” Scientific Journal 1 (May 1965): 76-78.

^7. Julian Morgenstern, “The Ark, the Ephod, and the ‘Tent of Meeting,’ " Hebrew Union College Annual 17 (1942-43): 263. Since the function of the tent is shelter, ibid., 183, it is the palladium or symbol of protection,

160, 184. While the root meaning of the

Greek skene is to shadow or shelter, “to live in tents” had the popular sense of living

adventurously: “Hypo skenais kai en

allodapei diatemenoi” (dwelling in tents and

in a foreign land), Heliodorus, Aethiopica 5

(2, 13). The tent in the backyard still holds

for the young the double appeal of adventure and cozy security.

^8. See Hugh Nibley, “Hierocentric State,”

Western Political Quarterly 4 (1951): 238-44; reprinted in this volume, pages 114-23.

The distinction between the leader of a

migrating band and a king in the

conventional sense has been treated by Karl

H. Bernhardt, Das Problem der

altorientalischen Königsideologie im Alten Testament (Leiden: Brill, 1961), who finds the transition from the leader of a nomadic

band ( mkrb) to the sacral “Grösskonigtum”

( mlk) to follow normally on the

establishment of a settled capital, ibid., 169, 178-79. “The holy tent itself was a visible

and potent title to his [David’s] position as

king,” i.e., there was no conflict between the two conceptions of dominion; Morgenstern

“The Ark, the ephod, and the ‘Tent of

Meeting,’” 242.

^9. Bernhard Grdseloff, “Nouvelles données concernant la tente de purification,” Annales du service des antiquités de l’Égypte 51

(1951): 130-31, 134, 138-39: Even the great ceremonial buildings retain the name of sḥ-nṯr, “tent of the god,” and íbw, “reed house.” The royal tent appears on

predynastic ivory tablets, Émile Massoulard,

Préhistoire et protohistoire d’Égypte (Paris: Institut d’Ethnologie, 1949), 446, and is

often mentioned in the PT 319, 345, 349,

363, 690; “O King, Horus has woven his

tent before thee; Seth has stretched out thy

canopy; the father is sheltered by the divine

tent . . . in thy favorite [camping] places.”

^10. Adriaan de Buck, ed., The Egyptian Coffin Texts, 7 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935-61), 1:253-54, Spell

60, is quite vivid. The lighting of fires in the shrine (represented by the ideogram of a

tent) is to drive away the evil things that lurk about at night; Alexandre Moret, Le rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 12-13.

^11. Jacobsen, “Primitive Democracy in Ancient Mesopotamia,” 153.

^12. Johannes Pedersen, Israel: Its Life and

Culture, 2 vols. (London: Oxford University Press, 1947), 2:454-55; W. H. Irwin, “Le

sanctuaire central israelite,” Revue biblique 72 (1965): 164; see above, n. 7.

^13. Haldar, Notion of the Desert, 19. “Men of all conditions and nations . . . look to the

Arab camp as a safe retreat and refuge,”

Philip J. Baldensperger, “The Immovable

East,” Palestine Exploration Fund

Quarterly Statement (1922): 170-71.

^14. In the Tent of Tryst the leader communes with God and transmits the divine

instructions to the people; Menahem Haran,

“The Nature of the ‘Ohel Mocedh in

Pentateuchal Sources,” Journal of Semitic

Studies 5 (1960): 52-54, 57-58; Alois Musil, Arabia Petraea, 3 vols. (Vienna: Hölder, 1907-8), 3:130, 353-55. All the great

patriarchs dwelt and communed with God in

tents; Immanuel Benzinger, Hebräische

Archäologie (Leipzig: Mohr, 1894), 11. The veil of the temple would seem to be a

survival of a nomad tent representing

heaven; André Pelletier, “Le grand rideau du

vestibule du temple de Jérusalem,” Syria 35

(1958): 218, 223-26; the antiquity of the

idea goes back to the prehistoric “reed wall”

through which Ut-Napishtim (the

Babylonian Noah) conversed with deity;

Lambert, “New Light on the Babylonian

Flood,” 118-19. We seem to detect an

Egyptian parallel in de Buck, Egyptian

Coffin Texts, 1:157, Spell 38.

^15. Morgenstern, “The Ark, the Ephod, and the

‘Tent of Meeting,’” 248; cf. 191-92, 194,

198, 201-2, 204, 206, 228, 254-55. The

author favors an original camel-mounting,

yet the oldest authentic example, from Dura

Europos, shows the Ark of the Covenant as

“plainly a small tent” mounted on a wagon

drawn by oxen, ibid., 250.

^16. András Alföldi, “Die Geschichte des Throntabernakels,” Nouvelle Clio 1-2

(1950): 537-66. Alföldi emphasizes the idea

of the sheltering baldachin as the worldwide

symbol of royal authority, an aspect also

treated by Morgenstern, “The Ark, the

Ephod, and the ‘Tent of Meeting,’” 171-72,

174-76, 178, 180-81, 196-97, 208, 212, 228.

^17. Jürgen Smolian, “Vehicula Religiosa: Wagen in Mythos, Ritus, Kultus und Mysterium,”

Numen 10 (1963): 202-27.

^18. So paradoxical do these combinations appear that scholars still have difficulty envisaging the biblical picture of Solomon’s throne or

bed beneath a sheltering pavilion supported

by cedar poles and mounted on a wagon;

Jacques Winandy, “La Litière de Solomon,”

Vetus Testamentum 15 (1965): 103-10. On the flying throne, August Wünsche,

Salomons Thron und Hippodrom, Abbilder

des babylonischen Himmelsbildes (Leipzig: Pfeiffer, 1906). The Persian world-capital is

Hvaniratha, the cosmic hub of the “loud-

moving chariot,” the real city being built on

the plan of the wheel; Jürgen Trumpf,

“Stadtgründung und Drachenkampf,”

Hermes 86 (1958): 139. See especially

Werner Müller, Die heilige Stadt: Roma

quadrata, himmlisches Jerusalem und die

Mythe vom Weltnabel (Stuttgart:

Kohlhammer, 1961), 101, 127-34. Throne, temple, and holy city have often been

identified; H. P. l’Orange, Studies on the Iconography of Cosmic Kingship in the

Ancient World (New York: Caratas, 1982), 917, 51-62, and so forth.

^19. As early as 2400 B.C., Shamash is depicted as traveling in his wagon by day and his boat

by night; Smolian, “Vehicula Religiosa,” 203,

220; J. van Dijk, “La fête du nouvel an dans

un texte de Šulgi,” Bibliotheca Orientalis 11 (1954): 83-88. In Egypt such ceremonial

boats and wagons are attested in the Old

Kingdom; Smolian, “Vehicula Religiosa,”

214. The great gods of the Indo-Aryans are

all wagon-riders of the skies, ibid., 204.

Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, ed.

James S. Stallybrass, 3 vols. (London: Bell,

1883), 1:252. Ancient shamans regularly

commuted between earth and heaven in

their wagons; Alföldi, “Geschichte des

Throntabernakels,” 548-49; Smolian,

“Vehicula Religiosa,” 208-11.

^20. This is the sense of the “cloud [that]

presumably rested upon the tent containing the Ark” at its “various camping stations,”

Haran, “Nature of the’ Ohel Mocedh,” 50.

While Smolian, “Vehicula Religiosa,” 226,

scouts the theory of some that it was the

contemplation of the stars of the Big Dipper

(Charlie’s Wain) that first gave men the idea

of constructing a wagon, he does suggest the

ingenious theory that wagon-springs were

invented to hold the wagon-box and its

sacred contents in a state of suspension

above the earth, ibid., 215. Alexander’s

funeral car that moved from Babylon to

Alexandria was a huge cuṭfa, or suspended shrine containing a throne; Diodorus,

Bibliotheca Historica XVIII, 26.

^21. Franz Altheim, Weltgeschichte Asiens im griechischen Zeitalter, 2 vols. (Halle: Niemeyer, 1947), 1:166. On the cleansing

offices of the wind, Eisler, Iēsous Basileus ou Basileusas 2:104-6. “As a swiftrushing mighty wind cleanses the plain,” Zend-Avesta, frag. VIII, v, 30, in James

Darmesteter, The Zend-Avesta, 3 vols.

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1880-87), 1:101.

^22. The Egyptians felt the heavens to be all around them: “The King’s horror is to march

in the darkness without being able to see

those [stars] which are above him and those

which are below him,” PT 260:323; see R.

T. Rundle Clark, Myth and Symbol in

Ancient Egypt (New York: Grove, 1960), 130-32. Benjamin Schwartz, “A Hittite

Ritual Text,” Orientalia 16 (1947): 31, gives a Hittite incantation expressing the common

belief that one can approach the stars by

climbing a very high mountain. According to

the cosmology of Theon, “the sun and the

planets around it form a party of travelers, a

‘caravan’—this being the exact meaning of

the Greek word synodia. " Erik V. Erhardt-Siebold, The Astronomy of John Scot

Erigena (Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1940), 16. The Arabic names of the

constellations show that the nomads thought

of themselves as moving and living among

the stars on their hunting migrations, Georg

Jacob, Altarabisches Beduinenleben (Berlin:

Mayer and Müller, 1897), 159-60.

^23. The kings’ ceremonial wagons are taken over directly from the sky-cars of their

divine ancestors; Smolian, “Vehicula

Religiosa,” 212, 214, 217, 219, 221-22.

Some ancient societies simply lived by

lightning; Seneca, Quaestiones Naturales II, 34; cf. Jacobsen, “Primitive Democracy in

Ancient Mesopotamia,” 138-40, 153-57.

^24. Cf. Gustave E. von Grunebaum, Muhammadan Festivals (New York:

Schumann, 1958), 19; Knut Tallquist,

“Himmelsgegenden und Winde,” Studia

Orientalia 2 (1928): 147-50. Qibla and qubba are cognate with Babylonian-Assyrian kibrat, “die 4 Weltquadraten des Alls,” and with the Sumerian kippat, “die 4

Weltecken,” Friedrich Jeremias, “Semitische

Völker in Vorderasien,” in Alfred Bertholet

and Edvard Lehmann, eds., Lehrbuch der

Religionsgeschichte, 2 vols. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1925), 1:513. Without the qibla, the wandering nomad would be lost in space,

Thaclabi, Qiṣaṣ al-Anbiyā’ (Cairo, 1922),

70.

^25. “Templum tribus modis dicitur . . . ab natura in caelo, ab auspiciis in terra, a similitudine sub terra,” Varro, De Lingua Latina VII, 6-9; the claim that this idea is of Greek origin does not detract from its significance, Stefan Weinstock, “Templum,” in RE 2:5:481; and

Stefan Weinstock, “Templum,”

Mitteilungen des Deutschen

Archäologischen Instituts. Römische

Abteilung 47 (1932): 100-101, 104, 107, 109. On the universality of the concept, W.

Kroll, “Mundus,” in RE 16:563. It was as leader of a migrating band that Romulus

would take his bearings on the heavens from

the door of his sacred tent; Samuel Pitiscus,

Lexicon Antiquitatum Romanarum, 3 vols.

(Venice: Balleoniana, 1719), 2:908. The

tent-temples of the Mongols were such

observatories; Henning Haslund-

Christensen, Men and Gods in Mongolia

(New York: Dutton, 1935), 282.

^26. The cosmic nature of various tents as the

“Himmelsgewölbe des Weltherrschers” is

discussed by Alföldi, “Geschichte des Throntabernakels,” 560-61. In Israel the tent

was a representation of heaven; Pelletier,

“Grand rideau du vestibule du temple de

Jérusalem,” 223-26; Albert Vanhoye, “Par la

tente plus grande et plus parfaite (He 9,

11),” Biblica 46 (1965): 5. Our quotation is from Comas of Prague, Topographia

Christiana (Christian Topography) 5, in PG

88:201.

^27. The prehistoric Ben-stone at Heliopolis seems to have been such a cosmic tent-pole;

Hermann Kees, Aegypten (Tübingen: Mohr, 1928), 1, 4, 6. Clark, Myth and Symbol in

Ancient Egypt, 59, quotes a Coffin Text:

“The Great God lives fixed in the middle of

the sky upon his support; the guide-ropes

are adjusted for that great hidden one, the

dweller in the city.” In PT 254 (280), the

king is “the star of those who stand in the

presence of the pillar [pole] of the stars.”

The concept is basic in shamanism: “The

pole in the middle of the shaman’s tent or

house is the symbol of the world-pillar. . . .

The posjo thus pictures that part of the universe where heaven and earth meet, and

where there is an opening . . . through which

one can pass to the outer world,” Nils Lid,

“The Mythical Realm of the Far North,”

Laos: Comparative Studies of Folklore and

Regional Ethnology 1 (1951): 62. The

Arabs call the World Mountain “the Central

Pole of the Tent,” Trumpf, “Stadtgründung

und Drachenkampf,” 133, n. 1, citing

Eliade.

^28. As the tent is a scale-model of the heaven, so the royal Schirmdach is a “Miniaturbild

des Himmelszeltes,” Alföldi, “Geschichte

des Throntabernakels,” 538. For a general

treatment, Robert Eisler, Weltenmantel und Himmelszelt, 2 vols. (Munich: Beck, 1910).

The festival wagon of the Panathenaeon was

covered with a tent woven of the same stuff

as the cosmic mantle of Athenia, see

Smolian, “Vehicula Religiosa,” 225; and PT

587 (1596-97); cf. PT 690 (2094), the Lady

Nut receives such a garment when the King

builds his holy city. The Tabernacle is the

likeness of the heavenly Temple, 2 Baruch 4:3-4.

^29. See n. 24 above. The four corner-poles of the ccuṭfa, the Ark, and so forth, as well as the central pole were decorated with astral

symbols; Morgenstern, “The Ark, the

Ephod, and the ‘Tent of Meeting,’” 179,

183, 194, 201. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob

are called “the three tent-poles of the

world,” Eisler, Weltenmantel und

Himmelszelt, 2:286, just as Peter, James, and John are “the three styloi (wooden poles) of the church,” Galatians 2:9.

^30. The round capitol dome with its supporting columns goes back to the Imperial Rundsaal derived from the domed mobile pavilion of

the Asiatic monarch; Alföldi, “Geschichte

des Throntabernakels,” 563-64. Four tall

wooden poles stood in front of every

Egyptian temple, suggesting the "4 pure

poles” of the tent of Osiris; PT 303; cf. 264.

The pillars of the Torah shrine represent the

four tent-poles of the Ark; Joseph Sloane,

“The Torah Shrine in the Ashburnham

Pentateuch,” JQR 25 (1934-35): 4-5.

^31. Sources in n. 18 above. The idea of organic extension is treated by L. Voelkl,”

‘Orientierung’ in Weltbild der ersten

christlichen Jahrhunderte,” Rivista di

Archeologia Cristiana 25 (1949): 155, and Hugh W. Nibley, “Christian Envy of the

Temple,” JQR 50 (1959): 101-3; reprinted in CWHN 4:394-95. For a bibliography, Hans Herter, “Die Rundform in Platons Atlantis

und ihre Nachwirkung in der Villa Hadriani,”

Rheinisches Museum für Philologie 96

(1953): 5, n. 9. “The first clear-cut trend

[towards urbanization] to appear in the

archaeological record is the rise of the

temple.” Robert M. Adams, “The Origin of

Cities,” Scientific American 203

(September 1960): 159.

^32. The oldest known stone temples are modeled after tents, C. M. Firth,

“Excavations of the Service des Antiquités at

Saqqara (November 1926—April 1927),”

Annales du service des antiquités de

l’Égypte 27 (1927): 109, as is also apparent

from prehistoric Mesopotamian seals. The ccuṭfa or qubba, according to Morgenstern,

“The Ark, the Ephod, and the ‘Tent of

Meeting,’” may be of leather, 207-9, of

“thin wooden boards,” 157, or of wooden

lattice-work, 160. The same is true of the

Roman templum and tabernaculum, and even of the golden domes of the great

Khans; Ibn Baṭūṭa, Riḥla (Cairo: 1938), 1:213. In studying archaic Mesopotamian

shrines, E. S. Stevens, “The Cult-hut or

Mandi of the Mandaeans,” Ancient Egypt

and the East (1934): 44, notes that “if a nomad tribe settles it at once uses reed mat

instead of the woven wool tent-cloth,” the

former being cheap and easily replaceable.

Thus the material of the tent does not

change its essential form or nature.

^33. H. G. May, “The Ark—A Miniature Temple,” American Journal of Semitic

Languages and Literatures 52 (1936): 215-34; Haran, “Nature of the ‘Ohel Mocedh,”

50. “Solomon did not dare infringe the

primary significance of the Ark. It might

‘rest’ in a house of cedar . . . but it must never cease to be the mobile vehicle of His presence, ready at any moment to resume its

activity,” W. J. Phythian-Adams, The People and the Presence (New York: Oxford

University Press, 1942), 16; cf. 23, 47.

^34. Cf. Stevens, “Cult-hut or Mandi of the Mandaeans,” 39-41. The common Indo-European root mand- signifies a structure of woven stuff; Julius Pokorny,

Indogermanisches etymologisches

Wörterbuch, 2 vols. (Bern: Francke, 1959), 1:699.

^35. Memphis, the first Egyptian city, takes its name from “the King’s campground,” Kurt

H. Sethe, Beiträge zur ältesten Geschichte Ägyptens (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1905), 124-25.

Jerusalem was laid out on the pattern of the

camp of Israel; Haran, “Nature of the ‘Ohel

Mocedh,” 61, 64-65. All great Moslem

conquerors “established cities, or more

precisely fortified camps, which later

became cities,” Claude Cahen, “Zur

Geschichte der städtischen Gesellschaft in

islamischen Orient,” Saeculum 9 (1958): 62.

So also the great Asiatic conquerors, Priscus

Rhetor, De Legationibus Gentium ad

Romanos 58, in PG 113:724 (Attila). The Mongol capitol was the urga or örgö,

“meaning ‘princely camp, palace,’” George

N. Rörich, Trails to Inmost Asia (New

Haven: Yale University Press, 1931), 135.

For the same system in Africa, Hans C.

Peyer, “Das Reisekönigtum des

Mittelalters,” Vierteljahrschrift für Sozial-und Wirtschaftsgeschichte 51 (1964): 17-18; Paul Radin, Social Anthropology (New

York: McGraw-Hill, 1932), 79. For Europe

see below, nn. 162-65. Archaeology bears

this out: the oldest Egyptian towns were

camps of mat huts or windscreens,

Massoulard, Préhistoire et protohistoire

d’Égypte, 33-34; so also in Palestine, John Waechter, “The Beginning of Civilization in

the Middle East,” Palestine Exploration

Fund Quarterly Statement 85 (1953): 130-31. “Polybius VI, 31, 10, compares the

Hellenistic city to the camp of a Roman

legion,” William W. Tarn, Hellenistic Civilization, 3d ed. (New York: Meridian, 1951), 310, such camps following the same

pattern as those of the Hittites, Hurrians,

and Assyrians, Alexandre Moret, Histoire de l’Orient, 2 vols. (Paris: Presses

universitaires, 1941), 1:462-63.

^36. Cyrill von Korvin-Krasiński, “Die heilige Stadt,” Review of Werner Müller, Die

heilige Stadt, in Zeitschrift für Religions-und Geistesgeschichte 16 (1964): 268, 270.

^37. See Nibley, “The Hierocentric State, 241-42; reprinted in this volume, pages 118-21. The

Greek expression for “hold a festival” is

simply skenein, to put up a tent; Martin P.

Nilsson, Geschichte der griechischen

Religion, 2 vols. (Munich: Beck, 1955), 1:779-80.

^38. The fathers cannot decide whether Jerusalem is in heaven or earth as it moves

between, Augustine, Contra Donatistas X,

26, in PL 43:409-10; Jerome, Epistolae (Epistle) 46, in PL 22:485, 489; Paul Baudrus Notae in Librum de Mortibus

Persecutorum, in PL 7:621; Cyril of Alexandria, Commentarius in Isaiam

Prophetam (Commentary on Isaiah) 18:18, in PG 70:468; Bede, Historia Ecclesiastica (Ecclesiastical History) III, 16-17, in PL

95:256-58.

^39. Jerome, Commentarius in Isaiam Prophetam (Commentary on Isaiah) 10:33, in PL 24:369. The Jews call the heavenly Jerusalem “the true tent,” since it “descends

from heaven as a tent,” H. Rusche,

“Himmlisches Jerusalem,” in Michael

Buchberger, ed., Lexikon für Theologie und Kirche, 10 vols. (Freiburg: Herder, 1930-38), 5:367-68. The Fathers believe that the

veil of the Temple represents the original

tent of communion with God; e.g.,

Epiphanius, Against Heresies II, 1, in PG

41:1049; Cyril of Jerusalem, De Adoratione in Spiritu et Veritate 9, in PG 68:589; Cyril of Alexandria, In Joannis Evangelium IV, 4, in PG 73:617; Theodoret, Ecclesiastical History IV, 16, in PG 82:1161; Jerome, Epistle 20, in PL 22:992; Raban Maurus,

Expositio super Jeremiam (Exposition on Jeremiah) XIII, 33, in PL 111:1065; Thomas Aquinas, Summa III, 457-58.

^40. Origen, Commentaria in Evangelium Joannis (Commentary on John( 10:23, in PG 14:381. The Church is a tent because it represents God’s coming to earth for

temporary sojourns with men; Richard of St.

Victor, In Apocalypsim Joannis (On the

Revelation of John) VII, 2, in PL 196:860.

The pitching of the tent outside the camp

represents God’s remoteness from this

impure world, Maximus Confessor, Capita

Theologiae et Oeconomiae, I, 83-84 in PG

90:1117; Wolber, Commentaria in Canticum

Canticorum (Commentary on the Song of

Solomon) III, 5, in PL 195:1203. In a very early Christian source “the Father comes

down from above with his tent of light,”

Evangelium Bartholomei, in PO 2:190. The Holy of Holies “is everywhere called a tent

because God tents there,” Theophylactus,

Expositio in Epistolam ad Hebraeos 9, in PG 125:297.

^41. Cf. Vanhoye, “Par la tente plus grande,” 1-3.

Cf. also Cyril of Alexandria, De Adoratione in Spiritu et Veritate 14, in PG 68:901.

John 1:14 reads literally, “the logos was

made flesh and pitched his tent [ eskenosen]

among us”; and after the Resurrection the

Lord “camps” with the disciples, Acts 1:4.

At the Transfiguration Peter prematurely

proposed setting up three tents for taking

possession, Matthew 17:4; Mark 9:5; Luke

9:33; see Hilary, Tractatus in Psalmos 14, in PL 9:300.

^42. Eduard Meyer, Ursprung und Anfänge des Christentums, 3 vols. (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1921-23), 2:48.

^43. Yigael Yadin, The Scroll of the War of the Sons of Light against the Sons of Darkness, tr. Batya and Chaim Rabin (London: Oxford

University Press, 1962), 4-5: the two camps

represent “the cosmic powers of light and

darkness,” 5; the camp is a holy place set

apart from all earthly contamination, ibid.,

70-75.

^44. Heinrich Zimmern, “Religion und Sprache,”

in Schrader, Die Keilinschriften und das alte Testament, 352-53, notes that the

“Kingdom of God” seems to be localized at

the North Pole, where it corresponds to the

divine mountain. In Egypt the Urhügel

(primeval mound) is preeminently the point

of contact between heaven and earth; Hans

Bonnet, “Benben,” in Reallexikon der

ägyptischen Religionsgeschichte (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1952), 100.

^45. Herter, “Rundform in Platons Atlantis,” 1-20. In Pharaoh’s garden all creatures enjoy a

safe asylum “suspended in the sky,”

Edouard Naville, “La destruction des

hommes par les dieux,” Biblical

Archaeological Society Transactions 4

(1875): 12-13. Such an island shrine in

Egypt was the island of Bigge, which was

identical with the hidden World-Mountain;

Hermann Junker, Das Götterdekret über das

Abaton, in Denkschriften der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien 56 (1913): 35-37.

Such a combined world-mountain and island

was Mt. Kardu, from which the Ark sailed

and to which it returned; Hippolytus, De Consummatine Mundi (spuria) ( On the Consummation of the World), Fragmenta

Dubia 5, in PG 10:709. All holy places are abstracted from the world; Iamblichus,

Protrepticus 21.

^46. One must swim to the shrine of the goddess, which is in a moon-boat; Lucian, De Syria

Dea (On the Syrian Goddess) 12-13, 32.

Smolian, “Vehicula Religiosa,” 203, notes

that the moon itself “swims” in the clouds.

The Midrash to Genesis 6:16 speaks of the

Ark as a floating temple. Hippolytus,

Fragment 3, On the Consummation of the World, in PG 10:707, tells how Noah took the body of Adam to the top of a holy

mountain “which was the Paradise of God,

the dwelling of religion and purity,” to keep

it from the flood, and there “placed it in the midst of a ship mounted on a wooden

framework.” From the wood of this

structure Noah made a thunderdrum which

summoned his sons to the Ark and brought

the storm. At the great Jubilee festival the

Egyptians beat on such a shaman’s drum, which represented the cosmos; Ludwig

Borchardt, “Die Rahmentrommel im

Museum zu Kairo,” Memoires de l’Institut

Français d’archéologie orientale 66 (1935-38): 1-6.

^47. Wünsche, Salomons Thron und Hippodrom; also n. 45 above. The Kacba orbited the

earth during the Flood, returning as the

Black Stone—a meteorite; Ad-Diyārbakrī,

Tarīkh al-Khamīs (Cairo, 1284 AH), II, 88.

^48. André Parrot, Ziggurats et la Tour de Babel (Paris: Michel, 1949), 208-9; and André

Parrot, “La Tour de Babel et les Ziggurats,”

Nouvelle Clio 2 (1950): 159. Pierre Amiet,

“Ziggurats et ‘Culte en hauteur’ des origines

à l’époque d’Akkad,” Revue d’assyriologie

et d’archéologie orientale 47 (1953): 30; Georges Contenau, Le déluge babylonien

(Paris: Payot, 1952), 246-47. In Egypt “la

pyramide et le mastaba sont des terrains de

transition entre la terre et l’au-delà" (the pyramid and the mastaba are the places of transition between the earth and the

netherworld), Moret, Histoire de l’Orient, 1:235.

^49. Alexander Scharff and Anton Moortgat, Ägypten und Vorderasien im Altertum

(Munich: Bruckmann, 1950), 56.

^50. Alföldi, “Geschichte des Throntabernakels,”

544-56. Towers were actually put on

wheels, e.g., by the Scythians; Xenophon,

Cyropaedia VI, 29.

^51. Haldar, Notion of the Desert, 68. Mildred Cable, The Gobi Desert (New York:

Macmillan, 1944), 16, describes “the acute

terror with which the Chinese regard the

Gobi regions,” which begin at the very gates

of some cities. For the earliest city-dwellers

“the dead-world of the steppe . . . began just outside the city wall,” Knut Tallquist,

“Sumerish-akkadische Namen der

Totenwelt,” Studia Orientalia 5/4 (1934): 21; and the city gates provided “the ritual of shutting up of a city so that sorcery might be excluded,” E. Douglas van Buren, “The

ṣalmé in Mesopotamian Art and Religion,”

Orientalia 10 (1941): 86.

^52. Henri Frankfort, The Birth of Civilization in the Near East (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1956), 54.

^53. Sigmund Mowinkel, Religion und Kultus (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck, 1953), 70; cf. 36,

75. The basic “ritual pattern” goes back to

the “Urhaltung des Menschen gegenüber

seiner Umwelt” (the primeval attitude of

man toward his environment), and proved

“Sicherung seiner ständig bedrohten

Existenz” (a defense for his constantly

threatened existence), Bernhardt, Das

Problem der altorientalischen

Königsideologie, 54.

^54. The Vara is both a city and a paradise; Zend-Avesta, frag. II, 25-38 (61-123), in

Darmesteter, Zend-Avesta 1:16-19; Moses Khorenatsci, History of the Armenians, tr.

Robert W. Thomson (Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press, 1978), 182-84 (II,

40-42); this is comparable to the rabbinic

picture in Babylonian Talmud Tacanith 31a.

Such a blessed oasis of refuge is the jiwār

where men and animals escape the violence of the elements; Thaclabi, Qiṣaṣ al-Anbiyā’, 24, 213; cf. Pierre Grimal, Les jardins

romains à la fin de la République et aux

deux premiers siècles de l’Empire (Paris: Boccard, 1943), 44, 86-90. The ancient

ringed camp of the nomads gave protection

from danger threatening equally from all

sides, and gave rise to some cities; Priscus

Rhetor, De Legationibus Romanorum ad

Gentes 3, in PG 113:713; Michael Prawdin, The Mongol Empire: Its Rise and Legacy,

tr. Eden and Cedar Paul (London: Allen and

Unwin, 1940), 82-86; William of Rubruck,

Journal 21, in Manuel Komroff, ed.,

Contemporaries of Marco Polo (New York: Liveright, 1928), 98, compares such

ringcamps to the camp of Israel.

^55. Al-Kazwīnī, Kosmographie, ed. Ferdinand Wüstenfeld, 2 vols. (Göttingen: Dieterich,

1848-49), 2:4-5.

^56. Vivid accounts may be found in Nabih A.

Faris, The Antiquities of South Arabia:

Being a Translation from the Arabic with

Linguistic, Geographic, and Historic Notes of the Eighth Book of Al-Hamdāni’s Al-Iklīl (Princeton: Princeton University Press,

1938); and (of great antiquity) Wüstenfeld,

"Älteste ägyptische Geschichte,” 331.

^57. L. Vax, “Le sentiment du mystère dans le conte fantastique et dans le roman policier,”

Etudes philosophiques 6 (1951): 72, 74.

^58. Cahen, “Zur Geschichte der städtischen Gesellschaft,” 61, citing Xavier de Planhol,

The World of Islam (New York: Cornell

University, 1957), ch. 1; cf. 64-66 in Cahen.

V. G. Kiernan, “State and Nation in Western

Europe,” Past and Present 31 (1965): 21, 25, maintains that there is no real

government at all in such cities.

^59. A. H. Godbey, “The Semitic City of Refuge,” Monist 15 (1905): 624-25. That a man was completely free and secure only in

the city, where alone he could realize his full potentialities, was a favorite Sophist theme,

e.g., Dio Chrysostom, Discourse L, 1;

Philo, Quod Omnis Probus Liber 1; cf. Al-Kazwīnī, Kosmographie, 2:4-5. As a city of

refuge Babylon offered freedom ( duraru) to all the world; Godbey, “Semitic City of

Refuge,” 615.

^60. The King “is the pivot round which the life of the community revolves. Upon his

physical vigour . . . depend the various

aspects of the well-being of the community,”

Lord Fitz R. Raglan, The Origins of

Religion (London: Watts, 1949), 74, citing Samuel H. Hooke; cf. Bernhardt, Problem

der altorientalischen Königsideologie, 54, 67, 80.

^61. Peyer, “Reisekönigtum des Mittelalters,” 17-20.

^62. Radin, Social Anthropology, 79. Tor Istram, cited by Bernhardt, Problem der

altorientalischen Königsideologie, 58, compared the coronation rites of 62 African

tribes and found that they regularly end with

the new king starting off on his Royal

Progress.

^63. Frankfort, Birth of Civilization, 97-98. The Pyramid Texts describe the dead king’s

journey to heaven in terms of continuation

of his Royal Progress on earth, e.g., PT 33

(24c-25b), 224 (218-20).

^64. Alföldi, “Geschichte des Throntabernakels,”

542-43. Among the Mongols the traveling

temple and tent-city accompany “the focus

of the universe, the life-giving residence,”

Prawdin, Mongol Empire, 330; Haslund-

Christensen, Men and Gods in Mongolia,

213, 283; Rörich, Trails to Inmost Asia,

343.

^65. Peyer, “Reisekönigtum des Mittelalters,” 1, 21.

^66. Cf. ibid., 1, 7-8, 12, 14.

^67. Of the ritual drama of the Ramesseumpapyrus, Sethe writes that “das

Spiel vielleicht auf einer Reise, in der der

neue Herrscher nach der Thronbesteigung

sein Reich durchzog, an verschiedenen . . .

Orten widerholt werden sollte, in erster Linie in den drei grossen Hauptstädten . . .

vielleicht aber auch an anderen bedeutenden

Orten” (perhaps the ritual drama should be

repeated in different places on the Royal

Progress in which the new ruler journeyed

through the kingdom after his ascent to the throne, particularly in the three great

capitals, but perhaps also in other important

places), which explains why the king

“uberall in dem Spiele in einem Schiffe

stehend auftritt” (appears everywhere in the

drama standing in a ship), Kurt Sethe,

Dramatische Texte zu altägyptischen

Mysterienspielen (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928), 96. On the Royal Progress of the new king

and his mother, Junker, Das Götterdekret

über das Abaton, 27-29; and Hermann

Junker, Die Onurislegende (Vienna: Hölder, 1917), 129-31, 168; also Hermann Junker,

Der Auszug der Hathor-Tefnut aus Nubien

(Berlin: Reimer, 1911), 74-76; cf. Wilhelm

Spiegelberg, Der ägyptische Mythus vom

Sonnenauge (Strassburg: Schultz, 1917), 53.

^68. G. Adolf Deissmann, Light from the Ancient East (New York: Doran, 1927), 368-73.

^69. Peyer, “Reisekönigtum des Mittelalters,” 1, 7-9, 12, 14. On Pharaoh’s tour as a

Besitznahme of the land, Siegfried Schott, Mythe und Mythenbildung im alten

Aegypten (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1945), 17-19.

There are vivid vignettes in PT 273 (the

“Cannibal Hymn”), 274, 317, 508, 690, and

in the Coffin Texts, de Buck, Egyptian

Coffin Texts, 1:77, 221, 268-70, 289, 328, 330; 2:163, 231.

^70. Peyer, “Reisekönigtum des Mittelalters,” 12.

^71. See Hugh Nibley, “The Arrow, the Hunter, and the State,” Western Political Quarterly 2/3 (1949): 344; reprinted in this volume,

page 20.

^72. So in Ireland, Peyer, “Reisekönigtum des Mittelalters,” 12; Scandinavia, ibid., 14;

Spain, ibid., 7-9; and England, ibid., 1.

^73. Kiernan, “State and Nation in Western Europe,” 35-37. Peyer, “Reisekönigtum des

Mittelalters,” passim, surveys the whole

European scene and finds no country

without the system.

^74. Carl R. Unger, ed., Saga Didriks Konungs af Bern (Kristiania: Feilborg and Landmark, 1853), 220-23, 239-42. On the unique

authority of this source, Heinrich Prell,

“Wildrinder und Drachen in der Siegfriedsage,” Archiv für Kulturgeschichte 32 (1944): 53, 71.

^75. See Nibley, “The Arrow, the Hunter, and the State, 343; reprinted in this volume, pages

18-19. The idea goes back to very early

times, when the king as the “Man of the

Steppes” is the protector of animal and even

vegetable life; Witzel, “Zu den Enmerkar-

Dichtungen,” 279-80; Anton Moortgat,

Tammuz: Der Unsterblichkeitsglaube in der

altorientalischen Bildkunst (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1949), 9-18, 22-26, 27-35. All

animals like all nations were expected to do

homage to the Emperor on his throne,

Wünsche, Salomons Thron und Hippodrom.

^76. Heinrich Rubner, Untersuchungen zur Forstverfassung des mittelalterlichen

Frankreichs (Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1965), 6; Hermann Thimme, “Forestis: Königsgut und

Königsrecht nach den Forsturkunden vom 6.

bis 12. Jahrhundert,” Archiv für

Urkundenforschung 2 (1909): 101-54.

^77. Cf. G. Waitz, “Die Anfänge des

Lehnwesens,” HZ 13 (1865): 90-91. Since the last thing the peasant did was to hunt,

that was the last thing forbidden him,

Thimme, “Forestis, Königsgut und

Königsrecht,” 127.

^78. Down to the nineteenth century the basic idea was that forest rights were a matter of

use rather than of abstract ownership. The

shift from Nutzungsrechte to Wildbann or

hunting rights began in Carolingian times,

Thimme, “Forestis, Königsgut und

Königsrecht,” 127, though the transfer from

hunting rights to absolute ownership came

very late.

^79. The idea of the ritual hunt as part of the coronation ceremony, A. F. L. Beeston,

“The Ritual Hunt: A Study in Old South

Arabian Religious Practice,” Le Muséon 61

(1948): 148, seems to go back to the earliest

times, when the king appears in glyptic art as a hunter who defends people and domestic

cattle from dangerous beasts of prey;

Moortgat, Tammuz, 9-18; Witzel, “Zu den Enmerkar-Dichtungen,” 279-80.

^80. On the background of the Royal Road or King’s Highway, Hans J. Rieckenberg,

“Königsstrasse und Königsgut in

liudolfingischer und frühsalischer Zeit (919-

1056),” Archiv für Urkundenforschung 17

(1942): 32-154.

^81. Peyer, “Reisekönigtum des Mittelalters,” 6.

The castles were the “main bases or

strongholds” of perpetually mobile

monarchs; Kiernan, “State and Nation in

Western Europe,” 32. The system can be

traced back to the policy of the Severi in

urbanizing and militarizing peasants, both

land-owners and tenants, by gathering them

in stathmoi, stationes, which were like forts, Michael Rostovzeff, Social and Economic

History of the Roman Empire, 2 vols., 2d ed. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1957), 2:426-27.

Stathmoi and stationes both mean “stopping place on the march.” Caesar based his

overall European strategy on castles, Gallic War II, 8, as did Alexander his Asiatic strategy, Quintus Curtis, Vita Alexandri VII, 9 and 11. In the ancient Near East,

marauding tribes and the kings who resisted them both based their strategy on castles;

Alan H. Gardiner, “New Literary Works

from Ancient Egypt,” JEA 1 (1914): 31-32, 23-24. The system gave birth to

marketplaces and cities in Mesopotamia;

Bruno Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien,

2 vols. (Heidelberg: Winter, 1925), 1:340-41.

^82. Castrum is traced ultimately to old Celtic words meaning “woven structure” and/or

“covering, shelter.” The plural means

“fortified camp.” Castrum can also signify a

shepherd’s hut or the distance between two

camps; Alois Walde, Lateinisches

etymologisches Wörterbuch, 3 vols.

(Heidelberg: Winter, 1965), 1:180.

^83. Peyer, “Reisekönigtum des Mittelalters,” 3; Alfred Ernout, Dictionnaire étymologique

de la langue latine, 2d ed. (Paris:

Klinksieck, 1951), s.v. “palatium,” deriving

it from Etruscan. “Tamerlaine built palaces

using them for the same purpose his

ancestors used tents. He wandered from

castle to castle, without spending more than

a night or two in any,” Prawdin, Mongol Empire, 478.

^84. Cf. German Betthimmel and Himmelbett.

For definitions, see Oxford English

Dictionary, 12 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1933).

^85. Morgenstern, “The Ark, the Ephod, and the

‘Tent of Meeting,’” 263.

^86. Alfred Jeremias, Das Alte Testament im Lichte des alten Orients (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1916), 316.

^87. Alfred Adam, Die Pṣalmén des Thomas und das Perlenlied als Zeugnisse vorchristlicher Gnosis (Berlin: Töpelmann, 1959), 3.

^88. Morgenstern, “The Ark, the Ephod, and the

‘Tent of Meeting,’” 190.

^89. Iliad 1:152-57; 21:106-13. Cf. E. V. Gordon, An Introduction to Old Norse (New York: Oxford University Press, 1927),

introduction. The Wild Host itself is driven

by the storm, n. 5 above.

^90. “I marched victoriously like a mad dog, spreading terror, and I met no conqueror,”

Daniel D. Luckenbill, Ancient Records of Assyria and Babylonia, 2 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1927), 2:99,

no. 176. The Babylonian king is “the

founder of cities, the one who places troops

under the yoke . . . who tramples their lands

under foot . . . who expands boundary and

border,” and so forth; Carl Bezold,

Historische Keilschriftexten aus Assur

(Heidelberg: Winter, 1915), 11. On his Royal

Progress the Canaanitish hero announces,

“Nor king, nor commoner shall make the

earth his dominion. . . . ‘Tis I alone that

shall reign,” Theodor H. Gaster, Thespis:

Ritual, Myth, and Drama in the Ancient

Near East (New York: Schuman, 1950),

183. The image of the invader is that of the

“ever-conquering and unconquerable host,”

Herodotus, History II, 46. “No people could stand against them to whatsoever land they

came,” Unger, Saga Didriks, 145.

^91. Faulkner, “‘Cannibal Hymn’ from the Pyramid Texts,” 98. When it is a necessity,

“raiding has always been regarded not only

as a primordial right but as a noble tradition,” Max A. S. Oppenheim, Die

Beduinen, 4 vols. (Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 1939), 1:34.

^92. Thus the bloody primordial contest between Horus and Seth has a strictly legal side from

the beginning, Rudolf Anthes, “Note

Concerning the Great Corporation of

Heliopolis,” Journal of Near Eastern

Studies 13 (1954): 191-92, as is clearly brought out in the text of The Contending of Horus and Seth, in Alan H. Gardiner’s The Library of A. Chester Beatty (London:

Oxford University, 1931), 8-26. The same is

true of the fight between Marduk and Kingu

in the Enuma Elish.

^93. Pharaoh is always the son of Horus or Re, warding off the attacks of Seth and his

depraved followers; Montet, Drame

d’Avaris, 54-58. Alexander posed as

liberator of the people of Asia from the

barbarian bandits; Quintus Curtis, Vita

Alexandri VII, 6.

^94. Trumpf, “Stadtgründung und

Drachenkampf,” 129-30, 142-45.

^95. Friedrich Dieterici, Thier und Mensch vor dem König der Genien (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1879), 1-6, 9, 11; cf. Aesop, Fables, no. 25.

For the great antiquity of the concept,

Spiegelberg, Der ägyptische Mythus vom

Sonnenauge, 47. The Persian king felt responsible for the animals and fined himself

a piece of gold for every beast slain in the

hunt; Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall

of the Roman Empire, 2 vols. (New York: Modern Library, 1932), 2:985.

^96. This is clearly seen in the very early (c. 1960

B.C.) account of Sinuhe: While he was

among the Asiatics, a neighboring chieftain

came to his tent (B 109-10) and challenged

Sinuhe as a trespasser (B 114-25); Sinuhe in

formal combat “did to him what he would

have done to me: I seized what was in his

tent and stripped his camp, and thereby

became enlarged in wealth and possessed of

much cattle” (B 144-47). James B.

Pritchard, Ancient Near Eastern Texts

(Princeton: Princeton University Press,

1955), 20.

^97. Tacitus, Germania 33.

^98. Down to modern times “each ruler saw himself first and foremost . . . as a warlord.

He figured in tournaments and might even

lose his life in them,” but he could not avoid them; Kiernan, “State and Nation in Western

Europe,” 22, 31. The wandering heroes of

the Avesta view all other nomads as robbers

and trespassers, to be challenged on the

spot, Arthur E. Christensen, “Die Iranier,” in Albrecht Alt et al., Kulturgeschichte des

alten Orients (Munich: Beck, 1933), 211.

Agathias, History V, 25, tells how the hordes of Asia consume themselves in perpetual

and ever-shifting combat which they think of

as noble. This culminates in the inevitable

showdown between the two unconquerable

hordes for the possession of the world,

Unger, Saga Didriks, 145 (Attila vs.

Ostanrix); Xenophon, Cyropaedia VII, 1

(Croesus vs. Cyrus).

^99. The rule is that all who ride are equally noble, though not of equal rank, Unger,

Saga Didriks, 144. Wandering knights may not trust each other; Christensen, in Alt,

Kulturgeschichte des alten Orients, 211.

^100. A. E. Crawley, “Ordeal: Introductory and Primitive,” in James Hastings, Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, 13 vols. (New York: Scribner, 1951), 9:507, and the series of

articles on the Ordeal that follows.

^101. F. R. Bryson, The Point of Honor in Sixteenth-Century Italy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935), 35, 45.

^102. Unger, Saga Didriks, 233. If a noble “did not maintain his own honor he could hardly

defend that of his prince or his country,”

Bryson, Point of Honor in Sixteenth-

Century Italy, 45.

^103. Rubner, Untersuchungen zur Forstverfassung, 7-8.

^104. Alan H. Gardiner, “Piankhi’s Instructions to His Army,” JEA 21 (1935): 219-20, and

Montet, Drame d’Avaris, 29, no. 3, both comment on the striking resemblance to

medieval chivalry.

^105. Smolian, “Kultischer Hintergrund bei Wagenrennen,” 264-65.

^106. M. E. Moghadam, “A Note on the Etymology of the Word Checkmate, " JAOS

58 (1938): 662; cf. L. Thorndike, “All the

World’s a Chess-board,” Speculum 6 (1931): 461.

^107. “Wheryn is al to wynne or al to lese,” R.

Dyboski and Z. M. Arend, eds., Knyghthode

and Bataile (London: Early English Text Society, 1935), 11; an excellent source both

for the mechanics and for the philosophy of

chivalrous warfare. The rule, citing Black

Khalil, is that “the conquered are the

property of the conqueror, who is the lawful

master of them, of their lands, of their

goods, of their wives, and of their children,”

Edwin S. Creasy, History of Ottoman Turks: From the Beginning of Their Empire to the

Present Time, 2 vols. (London: Bentley, 1854-56), 1:21; cf. Morgenstern, “The Ark,

the Ephod, and the ‘Tent of Meeting,’” 173-

74, 180-81, 187, 206, 209, and n. 123

below.

^108. Morgenstern, “The Ark, the Ephod, and the

‘Tent of Meeting,’” 207-23; the quotation is

from Alföldi, “Geschichte des

Throntabernakels,” 1.

^109. Cf. von Grunebaum, Muhammadan Festivals, 19; Tha’labi, Qiṣaṣ al-Anbiyā’, 24-25, 214.

^110. W. Helck, “Rpct auf dem Thron des Gb, "

Orientalia 19 (1950): 430. Cf. the “white towns” of the Creek Indians, “in which no

violence could be done, and the ‘red towns’

or ‘war towns,’” Godbey, “Semitic City of

Refuge,” 607. “Mohammed himself

continued to employ the kubbe of red

leather,” even though he “had denounced

red as the color of Satan,” Morgenstern,

“The Ark, the Ephod, and the ‘Tent of

Meeting,’” 217, 219.

^111. On tent and banner as symbolic of each other, see Morgenstern, “The Ark, the

Ephod, and the ‘Tent of Meeting,’” 160,

171, 179, 184, 187, 199, 205, 209;

Haslund-Christensen, Men and Gods in

Mongolia, 125; T. Canaan, “The Palestinian Arab House: Its Architecture and Folklore,”

Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society 13

(1933): 54-55; Stevens, “Cult-hut or Mandi

of the Mandaeans,” 43. Tent and banner

alike are a formal notice of defiance,

Giovanni P. Carpini, History 26, in

Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco

Polo, 44; Unger, Saga Didriks, 285.

^112. Cited by Irwin, “Sanctuaire central israelite,” 172-73, 183.

^113. Jacob, Altarabisches Beduinenleben, 211.

^114. Morgenstern, “The Ark, the Ephod, and the

‘Tent of Meeting,’” 261; cf. 180-82, 178,

197, 262; for a modern-day version, Carl R.

Raswan, The Black Tents of Arabia

(London: n.p., 1936), 86-97.

^115. Origen, Commentary on John 10, in PG

14:380-81.

^116. Yadin, Scroll of the War of the Sons of Light, 6-8, 70-75.

^117. Alföldi, “Geschichte des Throntabernakels,”

556. A thousand years earlier the hero of a

Ras Shamra ritual text drives his rival “out of the seat of his kingship, from the tent,

from the throne of his Sovereignty,” Cyrus

H. Gordon, Ugaritic Literature (Rome:

Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1949), 20, 26;

later an Assyrian king boasts that his rival

“left his royal tent [with its] couch of gold, the golden throne, golden footstool, golden

sceptre, silver chariot, golden palanquin, and the chain about his neck, in the midst of his

camp and fled alone.” Luckenbill, Ancient

Records, 2:34, no. 67.

^118. H. Idris Bell, Egypt from Alexander the Great to the Arab Conquest (New York:

Oxford University Press, 1948), 33.

^119. Gaie-ochos means not “earth-shaker” as usually translated, but “earth-holder” or

possessor: “Posei-daōon, oder Posei-dās,

was ‘Herr der Erde’ heisst,” Herman A.

Hirt, Indogermanische Grammatik, 6 parts (Heidelberg: Winter, 1927-37), 1:196.

^120. Iliad 7:442-63. The Greeks realized that the Great King had no choice but to destroy

them once they had refused him tribute: “He

cannot let us escape to laugh at him,”

Xenophon, Anabasis II, 4, 3-4.

^121. Ludwig Preller, Griechische Mythologie, 2

vols. (Berlin: Weidmann, 1872) 1:49-50.

^122. Livy, II, 50-51.

^123. Varro, in Servius, Commentarius in Aeneidem IX, 52. The challenge: “Do you give over your lands, your city, your

implements, weapons, wives, children and

property into the hands of me and the

Roman people?” Livy, I, 38, 2. The custom

survives in the Eastern Empire, as described

in The 1001 Nights (Bulak edition), 1:157.

^124. Unger, Saga Didriks, 52, 195-97, 202-4, 212. Quotation is from Georg von Below,

“Die Städtische Verwaltung des Mittelalters

als Vorbild der späteren

Territorialverwaltung,” HZ 75 (1895): 410.

^125. Froissart, Chronicle IV, 13.

^126. Morgenstern, “The Ark, the Ephod, and the

‘Tent of Meeting,’” has much to say on this

subject, e.g., 187, 209; see n. 117 above.

^127. Adam, Pṣalmén des Thomas, 11-12, citing

Psalm of Thomas 7:1, 4-7.

^128. John L. Burckhardt, Notes on the Bedouins and Wahábys, 2 vols. (London: Colburn & Bentley, 1831), 1:142.

^129. To divorce a man his wife has only to overturn his tent; Jacob, Altarabisches

Beduinenleben, 212. The most solemn oaths were taken with the right hand on the main

tent-pole: “If the tent trembles the oath is

false,” Gustaf Dalman, “Aus dem

Rechtsleben und religiösen Leben der

Beduiner,” Zeitschrift des Deutschen-

Palästina Vereins 62 (1939): 60. “The tent-poles are torn up immediately after [a] man

[without a male heir] has expired, and the

tent demolished,” Burckhardt, Notes on the Bedouins and Wahábys, 1:101. The

antiquity of the concept is attested in a Ras

Shamra formula: “uptorn be the ropes of thy

dwelling, overturned the throne of thy

kingdom, broken the sceptre of thy rule!” H.

Louis Ginzberg, “The Rebellion and Death

of Ba’lu,” Orientalia 5 (1936): 197.

^130. John Zonaras, Annals XV, 15, in PG

134:1360-61.

^131. Froissart, Chronicle I, 18 and 47

respectively.

^132. Trumpf, “Stadtgründung und Drachenkampf,” 149-54. See n. 129 above

for a still older version.

^133. On the three-day rule, Peyer,

“Reisekönigtum des Mittelalters,” 5, 7; cf.

Egilssaga 78:59. The Arabs allow “a certain liberty” of pasturage to those passing

through the country, Antonin Jaussen,

“Coutumes arabes,” Revue biblique 12

(1903): 256-57. When an army is merely

passing through Israel “the taking of wood is

to be allowed them; and ... they may also

camp anywhere and may be buried where

they fall,” Babylonian Talmud Erubin 17a.

^134. These definitions are substantially the same in the Oxford English Dictionary, Universal Dictionary, and Friedrich L. K. Weigand’s Deutsches Wörterbuch, 2 vols. (Giessen: Töpelmann, 1909-10).

^135. Cable, Gobi Desert, 86.

^136. For a full description, Raymond W.

Muncey, Our Old English Fairs (London: Sheldon, 1935); cf. P. H. Ditchfield,

“Stourbridge Fair,” Journal of the British Archaeological Association 19 (1913): 161, 163-64, 167, 171, 173.

^137. This of course is merely a suggestion. Just how far one may go with this sort of thing

can be learned from the Feugians, who, it is

believed, “stabled ground sloths in caves on

Last Hope Island” within historic times, and

still live in “portable skin toldas [!] or tent-houses,” Carlton Beals, Nomads and Empire

Builders (Philadelphia: Chilton, 1961), 41.

^138. W. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites (London: Harper, 1901), 244-54; cf.

458-65. Samuel N. Kramer, “Sumerian

Historiography,” Israel Exploration Journal 3 (1953): 230; M. San Nicolò, “Materialien

zur Viehwirtschaft in den neubabylonischen

Tempeln,” Orientalia 18 (1949): 289-300; Witzel, “Zu den Enmerkar-Dichtungen”

279-80; Kees, Aegypten, 42. The king

shared the take with the temple; San Nicolo,

“Materialien zur Viehwirtschaft,” 306.

^139. Frankfort, Birth of Civilization, 54. To the earliest Sumerian temples one paid

“Feldrentenbrote,” Anton Deimel,

Sumerische Grammatik (Rome: Pontificical Biblical Institute, 1924), 210.

^140. Seen. 120 above. Some early examples in Luckenbill, Ancient Records, 1:177-78, 182; 2:4, no. 7; 7-8, nos. 17-19; 8; Cf. Thimme,

“Forestis, Königsgut und Königsrecht,” 146.

^141. Witzel, “Zu den Enmerkar-Dichtungen,”

276. The earliest Indo-European kings

likewise paid to be left unmolested when

challenged, Paul É. Dumont, L’ Aśvamedha

(Paris: Geuthner, 1927), 356. The definition

of socage is from Webster’s Dictionary.

^142. Froissart, Chronicle I, 285. “Although moral virtue made even a private citizen

essentially ‘noble,’ it could not give him

rank,” which had to be bought and

maintained by prowess in arms, Bryson,

Point of Honor in Sixteenth-Century Italy, 15.

^143. A tax is basically “a compulsory contribution” and to tax is “to charge a

person with some offence,” Oxford English

Dictionary; Walter W. Skeat’s Etymological Dictionary traces the root to “tagsare; from tag-, the base of tangere, to touch.”

^144. R. H. Hilton, “Freedom and Villeinage in England,” Past and Present 31 (1965): 15-18; Froissart, Chronicle II, 73. Everywhere peasants agitated for the right of paying

guesting charges in money; Peyer,

“Reisekönigtum des Mittelalters,” 5, 10-11.

^145. Hilton, “Freedom and Villeinage in England,” 3.

^146. The stock objection to new taxes is that they nullify the agreement expressed in the

former taxes; Froissart, Chronicle I, 244; II, 83, 87, 158; III, 6. Anything beyond the

original tax was considered punitive, II, 128-

29.

^147. This is made clear in the fifteenth-century preface to Dyboski and Arend, Knyghthode

and Bataile.

^148. The idea was not introduced into Germany until the late twelfth century; Von Below,

“Städtische Verwaltung des Mittelalters,”

432. The nobility owe nothing to the

common people and disdain to bargain with

them; Hilton, “Freedom and Villeinage in

England,” 19.

^149. Cited by Kiernan, “State and Nation in Western Europe,” 21. With the

establishment of the prehistoric sacral

kingship, “history enters a groove from

which it is never to deviate appreciably,” E.

A. Speiser, “The Ancient Near East and

Modern Philosophies of History,”

Proceedings of the American Philosophical

Society 95 (1951): 585.

^150. See nn. 75-77 above. The quotation is from Rubner, Untersuchungen zur

Forstverfassung, 7.

^151. Froissart, Chronicle II, 143; II, 157; cf. III, 6.

^152. On the unique authority of Sir John Froissart, Chronicles of England, France,

Spain, and the Adjoining Countries, tr. and

ed. by Thomas Johnes, 2 vols. (London: 1857), 1:xli. Cf. Froissart, Chronicle I, 124; II, 103. Even a blind king must fight in the

field, ibid., I, 129.

^153. Froissart, Chronicle I, 207; III, 1.

^154. Ibid., II, 131-35. Froissart, himself both a knight and a priest, closely identifies the

interests of clergy and nobility, I, 176; III, 25.

^155. Ibid., I, 78. Both temporal and spiritual lords, bidding for the services of these

outlaws recognized their rights to plunder

and even offered them titles of nobility,

ibid., I, 254, 324; III, 10. They differed

from the true nobility only in being, as they

styled themselves, “the Late Comers,” ibid.,

I, 214.

^156. Wat Tyler and John Ball put themselves under Sir Robert Salle, ibid., II, 76, and the Smithfield mob marched under the king’s

banner, desiring the king to lead them. The

same situation is found in France, I, 181-84.

^157. Ibid., III, 1, 5, 7, 9-10.

^158. Kiernan, “State and Nation in Western Europe,” 26.

^159. Froissart, Chronicle I, 115, 184; II, 41, 46-47; III, 36. The rich burghers adopted all the trappings of nobility as their city

corporations bargained and made war with

kings and dukes exactly as the latter did with each other, ibid., I, 43, 45, 98, 123.

^160. Favoring an origin in trade are Fritz Rörig, Magdeburgs Entstehung und die ältere

Handelsgeschichte, in Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin 49 (1952); Hermann Aubin, “Der Aufbau des

Abendlands im Mittelalter,” HZ 187 (1959): 497-520. Markets were first introduced into

Germany in the ninth century, “the building

program of a Roman provincial market is the

same as that of the medieval German city,”

Friedrich Philippi, “Der Markt der

mittelalterlichen deutschen Stadt,” HZ 138

(1928): 235; cf. Ditchfield, “Stourbridge

Fair,” 161-74. Arnold’s theory that cities

grew up around forts is refuted by Von

Below, “Städtische Verwaltung des

Mittelalters,” 428, though Christopher Hawkes, “Hill-Forts,” Antiquity 5 (1931): 93, maintains that “politically the hill-fort . .

. was the Celtic version of the earlier Greek

polis.” Walther Gerlach, “Kritische

Bemerkungen zu neuen Untersuchungen

uber die Anfänge der Städte im Mittelalter,”

Historische Vierteljahrschrift 19 (1919): 331-45, notes that the great cities of Europe

did not begin as markets, but became cities

through Städterhebung by royal favor, ibid., 345. Some ancient cities were founded all at

once, while others grew up gradually,

Camillo Praschniker, “Die griechische

Stadt,” Anzeiger der österreichischen

Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Philosophisch-historische Klasse 84

(1947): 3.

^161. Carleton S. Coon, The Story of Man (New York: Knopf, 1954), 122.

^162. For civitas, Walde, Lateinisches etymologisches Wörterbuch, 1:224; for stadt, Friedrich Kluge, Etymologisches Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache (Berlin:

de Gruyter, 1963), s.v. “stadt,” and Sigmund Feist, Vergleichendes Wörterbuch der

gotischen Sprache (Leiden: Brill, 1939), 450-51. For gorod, burg, and town, see Jan de Vries et al., Altnordisches etymologisches Wörterbuch (Leiden: Brill, 1961), 164.

^163. For mahallah as a camp, Peyer,

“Reisekönigtum des Mittelalters,” 18; for

madinah, Meir Fraenkel, “Zur Deutung von Medina ’Bezirk, Staat’,” Zeitschrift für die alttestestamentliche Wissenschaft 77 (1965): 215.

^164. Von Below, “Städtische Verwaltung des Mittelalters,” 408.

^165. Ibid., 401, 406-8, 432, 437-38.

^166. Alfred Schultze, "Über Gästerecht und Gastgerichte in den deutschen Städten des

Mittelalters,” HZ 101 (1908): 487, 498-502.

^167. Ibid.

^168. Jean Albert-Sorel, “Le passe et l’avenir des droits de l’homme,” La Revue des deux

Mondes (1 May 1965): 69-82, notes that the Rights of Man first come to their own in the

French Revolution; but the basic concepts are set forth in the Baconian doctrine that

“replaced the name ‘God’ by the name

‘Nature’”; see Karl R. Popper, “Science:

Problems, Aims, Responsibilities,”

Federation Proceedings of the American

Societies for Experimental Biology 22

(1963): 961, who discusses the problem at

length. As for the humanist, “if men realize

that their careers are limited to this world,

that this earthly existence is all they will ever have, then they are already more than halfway on the path toward becoming

functioning Humanists,” Corliss Lamont,

The Philosophy of Humanism. (New York: Philosophical Library, 1957), 68.

^169. Nimrod is not only the archetype of the Wild Hunter, but he is also the founder of

the first state, the builder of the first walled city, and the organizer of the first real army.

In countless old legends Nimrod illustrates

the idea that he who would own the world is

insane. For general references, see Nibley,

“The Arrow, the Hunter, and the State, 339;

reprinted in this volume, pages 14-15.

^170. Josef Köstler, “Wald und Forst in der deutschen Geschichtsforschung,” HZ 155

(1937): 469.

^171. Compare the Egyptian “Regulator of the Festival or the Tent,” Massoulard,

Préhistoire et Protohistoire d’Egypte, 455, with “The King’s Office of Revels and

Tents,” in William Bray, “Observations on

the Christmas Diversions Formerly Given by

the Lord of Misrule, and on the King’s

Office of Revels and Texts,” Archaeologia

18 (1817): 313-32. The latter was also a

“Christmas Prince or Revel-Master,” and

“dined . . . under a cloth of estate,” ibid.,

314. His main duty was “to keep the tents

and pavilions belonging to the King,” ibid.,

317, which moved all over the country on

carts, accompanying the king as he held

festival in one place after another, ibid., 329-30.

^172. Alföldi, “Geschichte des Throntabernakels,”

554, 559-62, 564, tracing the institution

from Persia through “the royal festival tents

of the Greeks,” 562, to the domus aurea of Nero and the garden pleasure-domes of the

great Roman magnates, 563. A general

survey of the institution in the East is given by Moortgat, Tammuz, 139-42; cf. Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, 1:307-8, on the shrine and palace as gardens of Eden. Cf.

Hugh W. Nibley, “Sparsiones,” Classical

Journal 40 (1945): 524-26; reprinted in this volume, pages 152-54.

^173. Frankfort, Birth of Civilization, 24; see Nibley, “Sparsiones,” 532, 540-43; reprinted

in this volume, pages 158-59, 162-64.

^174. The Greeks call any passing show or vanity a skene, or tent, for which many illustrative passages are given in Henri Estienne, Greek Thesaurus (Geneva: Henricus Stephanus, 1573), s.v. “skene.”

^175. In expressing their preference of tents to castles the lords of the steppes said, “Every

one who is shut up is [already] captured,”

Budge, The Chronography of Bar

Hebraeus, 1:470. Until recent times in Mongolia it was “forbidden to all . . . to

erect permanent masonry. The free steppe is not to be ‘bound’ by heavy buildings,”

Haslund-Christensen, Men and Gods in

Mongolia, 284-85. Early Jewish and

Christian sectaries of the desert deplored the Temple of Jerusalem as a depravation of the

mobility of god’s people on earth, H. J.

Schoeps, “Die ebionitische Wahrheit des

Christentums,” in William E. Davies and

David Daube, The Background of the New

Testament and Its Eschatology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1956), 121;

Phythian-Adams, People and the Presence,

159-60; William Manson, The Epistle to the Hebrews (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1951), 35.

^176. The great sin of the human race was the attempt to pull up stakes and “from living in

tents to go over to settling in a fortified

metropolis,” Ernst Sellin, in “Nachtrag” to

O. E. Ravn, “Der Turm zu Babel,”

Zeitschrift der Deutschen

Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 91 (1937): 371. “The Ahl Hayt, or People of the Walls”

must pay a tax to “the Ahl Bayl, or dwellers in the Black Tents,” because they “have

forfeited right to be held Bedawin,” Richard

F. Burton, Personal Narrative of a

Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah and Meccah, 2

vols. (London: Bell & Sons, 1906), 1:114.

From the beginning “the city was a

questionable institution, at variance, rather

than in keeping, with the natural order,”

Frankfort, Birth of Civilization, 52-53.

There is an eloquent commentary on the

theme in Thomas E. Lawrence, Seven

Pillars of Wisdom (Garden City: Doubleday, 1935), introduction.

^177. “This world is but a temporary tenement, our real dwelling is in the other world,”

Babylonian Talmud Moced-Qatan 9b. John Chrysostom, In Epistolam ad Hebraeos (On

the Epistle to the Hebrews) II, 24, in PG

63:167, notes that while the ancient

Patriarchs “lived in tents as strangers and

pilgrims,” being tried and tested by the rigors of a wandering earth-life, the Church has

become obsessed with a shameful passion

for earthly security—“what a difference!”

He actually recommends that Christians

learn to live like the nomad Scythians,

despising security and rejecting the luxury

and defilement of city life, cf. John

Chrysostom, Homilia in Matthaeum

(Homily on Matthew) LXIX, 3, in PG

58:652. This is no mere rhetoric, since John

in a time of political and natural upheavals

had been forced to flee his city and live as a refugee in the camps of Asiatic nomads,

John Chrysostom, Epistolae 127—43, in

PG 52:687-97. Another important book is Ernst Käsemann, Das wandernde

Gottesvolk (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1939).

^178. “The Dogmatic Constitution on the Church,” chap. 7 in The Pope Speaks 10

(1965): 391-94. “Until the appearance of

new heavens and a new earth . . . the

wayfaring church . . . wears the ephemeral

look of this world,” 391; cf. 365, 382.

^179. They were to pay taxes, e.g., Luke 20:22-25, to allow themselves to be exploited

rather than to become involved in litigation, Matthew 5:25-26, to play the world’s game

just enough to allay suspicion, Luke 16:9,

11. They gladly conceded the rich man’s

right to his worldly possessions, since they

claimed only heavenly ones; Luke 16:25.

^180. “Scit se peregrinam in terris agere, inter extraneos facile inimicos venire, ceterum

genus, sedem, spem, gratiam, dignitatem in

coelis habere” ([Truth] knows that she is a

pilgrim in the earth, that she easily finds

enemies among strangers, but that she has

her race, home, hope, reward, and honor in

heaven), Tertullian, Apology 1, in PL 1:307-8; cf. Epistle to Diognetus 1. On owning lands, and so forth, Hermae Pastor

(Shepherd of Hermas), Similitudo

(Similitudes) I, 1, in PG 2:951-53; Hugh W.

Nibley, “The Passing of the Church: Forty

Variations on an Unpopular Theme,” Church

History 30 (1961): 138; reprinted in CWHN

4:178.

^181. On the purchase and sale of safe-conducts, Irving A. Agus, “Control of Roads by Jews

in Pre-Crusade Europe,” JQR 48 (1957-58): 96-98. The custom is ancient, Eugen I.

Mittwoch, “Neue aramäische Urkunden aus

der Zeit der Achämenidenherrschaft in

Ägypten,” Monatsschrift fur Geschichte

und Wissenschaft des Judentums 83 (1939): 95. On the importance of passports and the

reluctance of the nobility to issue and

respect them, Froissart, Chronicle I, 134, 189, 196, 225.

^182. Urban’s speech in 1095 lays strong emphasis on the total collapse of European

society and the need for a general escape,

Fulcher, Historia Hierosolymitana I, 2, in PL 155:825-41. Behind the Crusades was a universal “Sehnsucht nach Freiheit,” Martin

Grabmann, Die Geschichte der

scholastischen Methode, 2 vols. (Graz: Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt,

1957), 1:258.

^183. On the Assizes of Jerusalem, see J. B.

Bury, Cambridge Medieval History, ed. H.

M. Gwatkin and J. P. Whitney, 8 vols.

(Cambridge: University Press, 1924-36),

5:303; Steven Runciman, “The Crown of Jerusalem,” Palestine Exploration

Quarterly 93 (1961): 15; Angelo S.

Rappoport, History of Palestine (London: Allen & Unwin, 1931), 282-85.

^184. Adolf Waas, “Der heilige Krieg,” Welt als Geschichte 19 (1959): 215-16, describes the Crusades as the feudalization of Christianity

by the ancient chivalric tradition. The rival

claims of the nobility provided “a lawyer’s

paradise” with all the royalty of Europe at

one time or another claiming the crown of

Jerusalem, Runciman, “The Crown of

Jerusalem,” 8-9. See E. de Roziere,

“Introduction to the Cartulary of the Holy

Sepulchre,” in PL 155:1106.

^185. P. Leyhausen, “The Sane Community-a Density Problem?” Discovery 26

(September 1965): 33.

^186. “The optimum conditions for maximum physical and mental achievement remain

unknown,” Stamp, “Man and His

Environment,” 78.

^187. Leyhausen, “The Sane Community,” 31.

For a general survey, E. S. Deevey, “The Hare and the Haruspex,” Yale Review 49

(December 1959): 161-79.

^188. Leyhausen, “The Sane Community,” 28.

On territorial mystique among primitives, see

Adolphus P. Elkin, The Australian

Aborigines (Garden City: Anchor, 1964), 27-39.

^189. Leyhausen, “The Sane Community,” 31-33.

^190. Israel in the wilderness is cut off from the presence of God, Babylonian Talmud

Moced-Qatan 19b; this world is not their real home, ibid., 9b. Man’s true home and

origin is far away, Zohar I, 245.

^191. A very eloquent expression of this is the early hymn known as The Pearl, for which see Adam, Pṣalmén des Thomas, 1-28, esp.

24; see also 42-47. When men fell away

“the whole order of life upon the earth was

altered, with men in a state of rebellion

against God,” Clementine Recognitiones

(Clementine Recognitions) I, 29, in PG

1:1223-24. The early logia of Jesus (especially the Arabic ones) harp on man’s

lost glory.

^192. For this see the enlightening study of L.

Kákosy, “Ideas about the Fallen State of the

World in Egyptian Religion: Decline of the

Golden Age,” Acta Orientalia 17 (1964): 208-10; P. Montet, “Le fruit defendu,”

Kemi 11 (1950): 85-116.

^193. Plato, Phaedo 72E, 92D; Plato, Philebus 34C, 63E; Plato, Phaedrus 275A. The

departure of the gods from unrighteous

mankind is mentioned by Hesiod, Solon, and

Pindar.

^194. Othmar Spann, “Vom Gemeinleben des Menschen mit der Natur,” Zeitschrift für

philosophische Forschung 4 (1949): 527.

“Why does the question, ‘What is man?’

today sound like a cry of distress?” asks

Herman Dooyewerde, The Twilight of

Western Thought (Philadelphia: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1960), 174. Arland Essher,

Journey through Dread (New York: Devin-Adair, 1955), discusses Pascal’s “Shudder

before the Universe,” Kierkegaard’s

“Shudder before God,” Heidegger’s

“Shudder before Death,” and Sartre’s

“Shudder before the Other Person.”

^195. Wordsworth’s “Ode on the Intimations of Immortality” is a classic example. Spann,

“Vom Gemeinleben des Menschen,” 536,

quotes Eichendorff: “Sagt, wo meine Heimat

liegt?/Heut’ im Traum sah ich sie

wieder,/Und von allen Bergen ging/Solches

Grüssen zu mir nieder,/ Dass ich an zu

weinen fing.”

^196. Mircea Eliade, “The Yearning for Paradise in Primitive Tradition,” Diogenes 3 (1953): 18-30.

^197. “Yet this ‘adjustment’ to mass communities does the human species no more good than

drug-addition or alcoholism,” Leyhausen,

“The Sane Community,” 32.

^198. Deevey, “Hare and the Haruspex,” 162, 165.

^199. By the 1920s the idea of a hostile outer space was completely discredited: “The

skies, as far as the utmost star, are clear of any malignant Intelligences, and even the

untoward accidents of life are due to causes

comfortably impersonal. . . . The possibility

that the Unknown contains Powers

deliberately hostile to him is one the ordinary man can hardly entertain even in

imagination.” Edwyn Bevan, Hellenism and

Christianity (London: Allen and Unwin, 1921), 81. Today “outer space is the space

of openness, of danger and abandonment,”

in which man is “the eternal hunted

fugitive,” O. F. Bollnow, “Lived-space,”

Philosophy Today 5 (1961): 31-39.

^200. J. Pucelle, “Alienation et deracinement chez l’homme modern,” Algemeen Nederlands

Tijdschrift voor Wijsbegeerte en

Psychologie 50 (1957-58): 58.

^201. William M. McGovern, The Early Empires of Central Asia (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1939), 47-49.

^202. “Durch den donnernden Flutgang der Jahrtausende tönt eine Stimme, tröstend und

warnend: des Menschen Reich is nicht von

dieser Welt. Aber daneben erklingt eine brausende Gegenstimme; diese Erde . . .

gehört Dir, dem Menschen; sie ist dein Werk

und Du das ihrige: ihr kannst Du nicht

entfliehen. . . . Du musst ihr die Treue

halten. Diese unausgelöste Dissonanz bildet

das Thema der Weltgeschichte.” Egon

Friedell, Kulturgeschichte Ägyptens und des alten Orients, 4th ed. (Munich: Beck, 1953), 3. Pere Lagrange dreamed in the

desert of “les images de la vie nomade, si

naturelle, si simple, si proportionée à la

fragilité de notre existence!” But he

reprimands himself for thus slipping away

from reality, M.-J. Lagrange, “Chronique,”

Revue biblique 12 (1915): 255-56.

The Hierocentric State

In his great history of Greek religion,

Professor Nilsson comments on the neglect

by scholars of an institution of first

importance in the development of

civilization and the state. 1 That is the panegyris, the great assembly of the entire race to participate in solemn rites essential

to the continuance of its corporate and

individual well-being. The meeting was a

tremendous affair (Pindar leaves us in no

doubt about that), yet it was paralleled by

equally great and imposing assemblies of

other nations all over the ancient world. At

hundreds of holy shrines, each believed to

mark the exact center of the universe and

represented as the point at which the four

quarters of the earth converged—“the navel of the earth”—one might have seen

assembled at the New Year—the moment of

creation, the beginning and ending of time—

vast concourses of people, each thought to

represent the entire human race in the

presence of all its ancestors and gods.

A visitor to any of these festivals would

have found a market or fair in progress, the

natural outcome of bringing people together

from wide areas in large numbers, and the

temple of the place functioning as an

exchange or bank. He could have witnessed

ritual contests: foot, horse, and wagon races, odd kinds of wrestling, choral competitions,

the famous Troy game, beauty contests, and

what not. He would note that all came to the

celebration as pilgrims, often traversing

immense distances over prehistoric sacred

roads, and dwelt during the festival in booths of green boughs.

What would most command a visitor’s attention to the great assembly would be the

main event, the now famous ritual year-

drama for the glorification of the king. In

most versions of the year-drama, the king

wages combat with his dark adversary of the

underworld, emerging victorious after a

temporary defeat from his duel with death, to

be acclaimed in a single mighty chorus as the

worthy and recognized ruler of the new age.2

The New Year was the birthday of the human

race, and its rites dramatized the creation of the world; all who would be found in “the

Book of Life opened at the creation of the

World” must necessarily attend this event.

There were coronation and royal marriage

rites, accompanied by a ritual representing

the sowing or begetting of the human race;

and the whole celebration wound up in a

mighty feast in which the king as lord of

abundance gave earnest of his capacity to

supply his children with all the good things of the earth. The stuff for this feast was

supplied by the feasters themselves, for no

one came “to worship the King” without

bringing his tithes and first fruits. 3

Volumes would not suffice to trace the

survival of present-day institutions

throughout the world from the practices and

rites of the ancient national assemblies. They were the general reservoir into which the

myriad culture-streams of an earlier day

eventually found their way, and from which

are supplied in turn the mainstreams of our

civilization. Space will not allow us to

examine these magnificent gatherings one by

one, nor is it necessary to draw the same

identical picture a score of times; however,

since no work on the subject has to our

knowledge yet appeared (though the

evidence is neither suspect nor difficult of

access), it will be necessary to reinforce our

claims by passing quickly from west to east over the ancient world, pointing out as we go

some of the more important sources to which

the student might turn for a description of a

score of the more illustrious assemblies.

Beginning in the far northwest, we may

take the great Things of Iceland as typical of the primitive assemblies of the whole

Germanic North. The meeting place was a

mound (the holy logberg, mountain of the law) in the center of a stone circle where the four quarters of the island met; the president of the meeting was a ritual king (the Gothi);

attendance was compulsory; booths, feasting,

games, markets, and the rest were never

lacking.4 Identical though more imposing were the rites at Uppsala5 and at various Teutonic shrines on the continent.6 Typical of all Celtic nations was the Beltene fair of the Irish at Usenech, held “at the turn of the

year,” at the hill where stood “the stone and

umbilicus of Ireland . . . regarded as being in medio et meditullio terrae positus”

(situated in the center and middle of the

land). 7 There the king of the new age was established and the creation of the world

was rehearsed.8 An inscription from Ancyra recording just such a fair of the ancient

Galatians9 reminds us that we are dealing with no medieval innovations in the Irish

fairs or in those of Britain10 and Gaul, 11

which follow the same pattern.

In moving terms, Cicero has described

the immemorial rites at Enna in Sicily: “It is the exact center of the island, and is called

the navel of Sicily” where, at a sacred lake

in the top of a mountain, there congregates

once a year “a renowned assemblage of

people not only from Sicily but from other

nations and races. ”12 Rome itself was originally, and forever remained, a place of

universal assembly. The old Roma quadrata was, or contained, a circular enclosure

divided into four equal parts, at the center of which stood the lapis manalis, the seal of the underworld, marking the mundus—a

term held by some to be identical with the

Greek kosmos. 13 At the end of the sacred roads stood the king’s house on the holy

mount. Hither repaired the whole human race

for the ludi saeculares, the universal birthday party from which no human being

was permitted to be absent. On this

occasion, the king acted as host to all the

world; and having won a ritual contest with

the powers of darkness, the king was hailed

as father and king of the race for a hundred

years. 14

The panegyris of the Greeks has

already been mentioned. Delphi furnishes the

best known, but by no means the only,

example. There the god sat on his holy

mound, “the middle omphalos, the navel of the earth,” to bestow his blessing on the

multitudes that came along the sacred roads

to pay him homage on his birthday15 and to live in booths and hold their feasts, games,

and markets.16 Jane Harrison and others have fully demonstrated the royal combat, victory,

and coronation to be the original kernel of

the rites. 17

Scholars have long noted the

remarkable parallel between the Greek rites

at Eleusis and those at the great Slavic shrine of Svantevit: aside from the death-and-resurrection motif of the mysteries, the

Slavic assemblies resemble those of other

nations in every particular.18 The great Egyptian assemblies that astonished the

Greeks by their size and splendor were from

the beginning New Year’s gatherings to

celebrate the coronation of the king;19 the

place was the mountain of creation at the center of the universe,20 and all the essential aspects of the panegyris were

conspicuous.21 The Kaba at Mecca is still thought to mark the exact middle of the earth

and hub of the universe; it is surrounded by

special shrines marking the cardinal points,

and the roads that lead to it are holy, the

main one being called the Royal Road. 22

There at a set time the whole human race

must assemble in one tremendous concourse,

as it shall assemble on the Day of Judgment

before the throne of God. 23 It was common in the Middle Ages to represent Jerusalem on

maps as the exact center of the earth and to

depict the city itself as a quartered circle

(fig. 9). Long before the days of the prophets, that place was the seat of a great assembly

and of the royal year-drama, of which many

echoes still survived in the Bible. 24 The records from Ras Shamra describe the same

type of rites in ancient Syria, 25 and early Christian writers tell of other great

assemblies in the desert. 26

Figure 9. Like the famous Roman

castra of later centuries, this

Assyrian royal camp (A) has two

intersecting avenues dividing it into quadrants with scenes of

sacrificing and cooking. Even the

king’s horses have their own

elaborate tent as preserved on a

stone relief from the throne room of

Assurnasirpall II, Nimrod, Iraq,

883-859 B.C.

Millenia later the same ideal

geometry demands that the sacred

city of the Jews and Christians must

also be be perfectly encircle by

battlements, as depicted in this

Icelandic map (B), A.D. 1200-1300.

It ignores the actual shape of the

outer walls of Jerusalem but

accurately depicts its streets in the

cardinal directions (C).

The most complete descriptions of the

year-rites, as of the hierocentric doctrine,

have been supplied by the Babylonian investigators, to one of whom (Father

Burrows) we are beholden for the term

hierocentric as that which best describes those cults, states, and philosophies that

were oriented about a point believed to be

the exact center and pivot of the universe. 27

Dumont and Albright have collaborated to

demonstrate the essential—prehistoric—

identity of the earliest Babylonian rite with

the greatest festival of India, the

Aśvamedha. 28 But perhaps the most brilliant of all the great assemblies took place at the

Persian Nauroz—continuing the very ancient

practices described in the Avesta and the

Vedas—when all the world followed the

Royal Road to the presence of the king to

present their gifts and feast as his guests on his birthday, the New Year, the only day on

which his glory was visible. 29 The great annual assemblies at the courts of the

Mongol khans and the Chinese emperors (cf.

fig. 10), to which we shall refer below,

follow the identical pattern. It also occurs in the New World and among primitive tribes.30

The Kingly Calling

But granted that these great assemblies

did take place, and that the rites were far too peculiar and elaborate to have been

independently invented in a hundred different

places, what then? The dominant position of

the king in the hierocentric rites suggests the kingly office as the natural point of departure for further examination of the origin and

survival of the system.

Figure 10. An 1880 eyewitness

sketch of one of the imperial

ceremonies at the circular marble

terraces of the Altar of Heaven,

Peking. Officials of the Manchu

government have erected a square

canopy over wooden tablets

representing the ancestor of the

Ch’ing Dynasty. It is on this same

sacred center that the Emperor

stands at the solstices in his role as

the Son of Heaven. In the distance, at the other end of the sacred axis,

is the oft-photographed Hall of

Abundant Harvests with its

encircling twelve columns and

three-tiered roof.

Within recent years a number of

important studies have appeared treating the

sacral kingship as a single uniform institution throughout the ancient East. 31 The orthodox conceptions of kingship are not legion but

only one. This conception is clearly restated

by each monarch in his turn.

From the beginning Pharaoh is “ruler of

all that which is encircled by the sun, ”32 he is “the son of God, none can resist him; all

people are subject to him, his bounds are set

at the ends of the earth,” to him the gods

“have promised world dominion. ”33 In Babylonia where “the earthly was a

counterpart of the heavenly monarchy, but distinct, ”34 Naramsin called himself “King of the Four Regions” and “King of the

Universe.” Goetze says that the Weltreich-

Idee was first carried out in practice by those Semitic conquerors who made Akkad

the Mittelpunkt der Welt (center of the world) at about 2600 B.C. Whether or not

this actually was the first world empire,

from that time on every state in the East

“erstrebt fur sich theoretisch die Weltmacht”

(theoretically aspires to world dominion).35

The Assyrian king duly called himself “King

of the four quarters of the world, the sun of

all peoples ... conqueror of the faithless ...

whose hand conquered all who refused him

submission . . . whose priesthood in the

temple and rule over all peoples, Enlil made

great from days of old” ;36 and described his divine calling and mission as that of forcing

all the world “from the rising of the sun unto

the setting of the same . . . to acknowledge one supremacy.” 37 The earliest kings of Elam and Susa also described themselves as

“King of the four regions,” and “exalted

messenger and high-commissioner of

heaven, ”38 even as the later Achaemenids,

“lords of all people, from sunrise to sunset,”

felt obliged to conquer all the world for

Ahura Mazda, to whose rule every enemy

was invited to submit before being

attacked. 39 As late as 1739 a Persian shah could stamp upon his money: “O coin,

announce to all the earth the reign of Nadir,

the King who conquers the world.” 40

The Roman emperor is, from the first,

“virtutum rector” (instructor in virtues) of

the world, “salus orbis, Romae decus . . .

magnus parens mundi” (the salvation of the

world, the glory of Rome . . . the mighty

father of the earth),41 and so forth, after the

pattern of the old sacral kings. 42 The basic doctrine of Hellenistic kings is that every

true king is a universal king; the divine urge of kings cannot be satisfied with anything

less than the world because Zeus the world-

king is the only model for them. 43 The Byzantine emperor, bearing the titles and

insignia of the Persian kings in conscious

imitation, was “by definition the master of

the universe.” “II a pour devoir . . . de

propager la foi orthodoxe a travers toute la

terre habitee, dont Dieu . . . lui promet la

domination” (he has as his duty . . .

spreading the orthodox faith throughout the

whole inhabited world, whose rule God

promises him);44 and he tells his son that God has placed his throne “like the sun

before Him. . . . He hath given to thee as

worthy His own dominion over all men.” 45

“Abscondat solem, qui vult abscondere

regem” (whoever wishes to hide the king

may as well try to hide the sun)! cries a medieval panegyrist of the French king, 46

who claimed to be the true successor of the

emperor and nothing less than “king of kings

and the greatest of princes under heaven. ”47

The great Attila called himself totius mundi principem (the lord of the whole earth) in the firm conviction that the miraculous

finding of the sword of Mars that he bore

was a sign from heaven that he should rule

the world. 48 He was greatly incensed when he learned that a Roman ambassador had

declared him to be only a man, whereas

Theodosius was a god. 49 In the sixth century, the Khagan of the Turks declared that “all the earth from the rising to the setting of the sun is his inheritance, and all who have dared

oppose the Turks have been duly

enslaved.” 50 A thousand years before, when Darius demanded that a Scythian king bring

him earth and water, the latter replied that as

a descendant of God he was the only legitimate ruler. 51 The ninth and tenth centuries of our era saw an epidemic of

world-kings in higher India, Cambodia, and

Java, all of whom “ambitionnaient d’etre

souverains universels” (sought to be lords of

the earth), mystically identical with the

universal God himself, for whom they sent

out their missionaries to win the world.52

When the papal legate Ezzelino

announced at the court of the Great Khan that

his master was “placed high above all the

kings and princes of the world, and . . . is

honored by them as their Lord and Father,”

his Mongol hosts held their sides with

laughter; the nonentity in the West was

claiming to be exactly what their Khan obviously was in reality. 53 “The Sky had ordered me to rule all nations,” was the

sincere pronouncement of Chingis Khan,

Ssuto-Bogdo, the God-sent, “whose word

was heaven’s will.” 54 To his successor, he says: “Emirs, Khans, and all persons shall

know that I have delivered over to you the

whole face of the earth from sunrise to

sunset. All who . . . oppose . . . shall be

annihilated.” 55 At the same time the pontiffs of Rome were stating like claims in like

words, and when the Pope’s messenger told

Kuyuk that all princes were subjected to his

master, the latter answered: “The might of

the Eternal Heaven had given the Khagan all

lands from sunrise to sunset, and failure to

obey his commands was a crime against

God. . . . Any who made the slightest

resistance would be annihilated and

exterminated.” His seal bore the inscription:

“God in heaven, and Kuyuk Khan upon earth,

the power of God: the seal of the emperor of

all men. ”56

When the Khan’s emissaries bore this

doctrine to the court of the Caliph (as the

pope’s legates had to his), the latter countered with the identical doctrine: “You

have become in your own eyes the Lord of

the Universe, and think that your commands are the decisions of fate. . . . Do you not

know that from East to West those who

worship God, from kings to beggars, are all

slaves of this court?” 57 The corollary to this is the doctrine that “war against those who

are not Moslems is a solemn obligation to

God. . . . It is a duty to attack the infidels, even though they may have committed no act

of aggression.” All the world must be

repeatedly invited to accept Islam, and

whoever refuses must be wiped out by all

possible means. 58 By the end of the tenth century the Caliphs had under Turkish

influence and with the aid of the court

theologians preempted the tremendous title

of the Persian kings and announced that “all

the world must follow the guidance of the

Commander of the Faithful.” 59

In China, the Ming emperors after the

expulsion of the Mongols “took over the

claim to world dominion” and “sent

embassies to every country over which

Kublai Khan had once held sway, demanding

instant submission.” 60 At the other end of the Mongol world, Tamerlane sought to fulfill

the prophecy that he “with the might of his

sword, will conquer the whole world,

converting all men to Islam.” 61 Even then the Grand Prince of Muscovy was preparing to

assume the might and glory of the Golden

Horde and to call himself God’s chosen one

and “the only orthodox sovereign in the

world. ”62

All these sample claims, it will be

noted, are one and the same. There is no

variety among them, no nuances or fine

distinctions and shadings such as one might

expect. There are other royal claims, but this is the common doctrine of the great

conquerors. It is clear and unequivocal in

each case: (1) the monarch rules over all

men; (2) it is God who has ordered him to do

so and, significantly, none claims authority

as originating with himself, but even the

proudest claims to be but the humble

instrument of heaven;63 (3) it is thus his sacred duty and mission in the world to

extend his dominion over the whole earth,

and all his wars are holy wars; and (4) to

resist him is a crime and sacrilege deserving

no other fate than extermination. The most

obvious corollary of this doctrine is that

there can be only one true ruler on earth.

“The eternal command of God is this,” wrote

Mangu Khan to Louis IX, “in heaven there is

but one eternal God; on earth, there is no

other master than Chingis Khan, the Son of

God.” 64

In the great “provincial” cultures of Egypt, 65 India,66 China,67 and, as we shall see, of Europe also, this doctrine of kingship appears not as a local invention but clearly

as an importation from the steppes of Asia.

That is true even of Islam. When, in A.D.

979, the king of the Turks and Deilemites

kissed the earth before the feet of a newly

elected caliph, a Moslem general standing by

cried out in horror: “O King, is that God?”

But the new caliph was much pleased by this

custom of the plains, and in time this Central Asiatic king-worship became a permanent

fixture in Islam as in Byzantium. 68

This peculiar but universal conception

of kingship may be traced ultimately to

Central Asia through, among other things, its

close association in theory and practice with

the hierocentric point. The universal type of

hierocentric shrine bears many marks of its

origin.

Mountain and Palace

At every hierocentric shrine stood a

mountain or artificial mound and a lake or

spring from which four streams flowed out to

bring the life-giving waters to the four

regions of the earth. 69 The place was a green paradise, a carefully kept garden, a refuge

from drought and heat. Elaborate

waterworks figure conspicuously in the

appointments and the rites of the holy place.

The long ritualized wandering of the

pilgrims through the desert, thirsting for the waters of life; the idea that the sacred place is a Vara outside of which all is a howling desert; the groves and the cultivated gardens

where all creatures are at peace; the mighty

central tree that gives shelter to all the

creatures of heaven; the stories of a great

snake (dragon) that haunts the place and

frightens off those who come for the blessed

water70—all such things make it clear that

our hierocentric shrines are supposed to represent an oasis, and forcibly bring to

mind Pumpelly’s theory that world

civilization originated in the oases of Central Asia.

It is the water-mountain combination,

artificially produced at so many important

shrines, that most strongly suggests Central

Asia, where the cattle-dependent nomads

have always escaped the deadly drought of

summer by driving their beasts to ancestral

campgrounds at the source of a sacred river

high in the valleys of a holy mountain. It is

there that they elect their khans, and it is

from there that their world empires take their rise. 71 Throughout the world, those who come to the great assembly are supposed to

drive cattle with them. The rites at Olympia

and Rome were founded when Heracles

drove his cattle, dying of thirst, to those

places. 72 The Babylonian counterpart of this

hero is himself a seeker for water and is shown on early seals watering his cattle

from an overflowing vase. 73 In the north the cow Authumla stands on the mountain at the

source of the four world-rivers. The Koran74

specifically states that the rites of Mecca and all great assemblies are “over the cattle”

which God has given men for sustenance;

and, indeed, the common cult symbol of the

archaic assembly is the bull’s head. 75 We are reminded of the wonderful prehistoric rock

pictures which, all over the world, depict the driving of great herds of cattle to holy water holes.

The seasonal aspect of the great

assembly is but the beginning. The interval

of a year between meetings was too much to

assure firm government, and the sacred place

was often too awkwardly located. So

throughout the world we have a

multiplication of “law-days” and “crown-

days” which are but the duplication of the year rite, 76 while new and more useful assembly places supplant the old. Thus the

stone of Tara to which the ancient Irish

would drive their cattle at the New Year was

moved to Tailtiu when that became the

capital, as the shrine of Delphi to which all

men drove their hecatombs was later moved

to Delos.77 William of Rubruck78 tells us that while the real holy center of the Mongols

was the Ononkulitai (the ancestral burial and

assembly place on the holy Altai beside the

equally holy Onon River), for purposes of

administration it had been supplanted by

Karakorum, a centrally located roundup

center to which the tribute animals could be

most conveniently driven from all parts of

the empire. Chingis Khan’s great minister

Yeliu-Ch’uts’ai had “insisted that such a

fixed point was essential, so that the tribes

might know to what place to send tribute,

and come to regard it as a centre of administration.” 79 Chingis Khan himself

“fully realized the necessity of finding

himself a safe refuge, a definite, if movable, center, that might become a rallying point, a

citadel, as it were, of his nascent empire,”

from which he might send out the “arrow

messengers” with his orders to all the

world. 80 Baghdad, says Al-Fakhrī, was founded in a holy place by the “Khalif of all

men” to be “the blessed city,” and “the house

of salvation”; but it was chosen as the most

central spot in the empire to be reached with

equal ease from all directions, and the tribes of the four regions were admitted to it, each

by the appropriate gate. 81 Thousands of years before, the Babylonian and Assyrian

kings had observed the identical practice: “I

founded a city in the desert, in a waste, and

from its foundation to its top I completed it.

A temple I builded and placed a shrine of the

great gods in it . . . and I opened a road to it.” Here we have a hierocentric point where

the king on his throne could “receive the

heavy tribute of the four regions in the city of Assur, son of Shalmaneser, King of the

Universe.” “I opened a palace in the city of

Tushhan; the tribute of the land of Nidrun . . .

I received in the city of Tushhan.” “I opened

a palace in the city of Tiluli and received the tribute of the land of Kutmuhi.” 82 The names of the gates of such places—always facing

“the four winds”—tell what they are for:

when they are not proclaiming an abundance

of water, they have such titles as “Bringing

the Products of the Mountains,” “The Gifts of

the Sumu’ anite and the Temite Enter through

It,” “Door of the Products of the Lands,” and

so forth. 83 The oldest temple complexes in the world, at Ur and Mohenjo Daro, were

such places of gathering, it is supposed.

The Persians kept the system, covering

the world with scale-models of the royal palace to serve as local collection centers. 84

The oldest of such shrines and collection

points would seem to go back to early

hunters. Xenophon tells of visiting a shrine

of the Asiatic hunting goddess, where hunters

would come to sacrifice and the lady would

feast all who brought their tithes with bread, wine, and meat as they camped in their

booths in the sacred enclosure. 85 This shrine, he says, was an exact replica of the great

central temple of the goddess at Ephesus.

The picture of the prehistoric Anahita (the

same goddess to whom Xenophon refers) is

a genuine piece of steppe-lore: clothed in

magnificent furs and gold, the lady rides in

her great wagon from one of her thousand

castles to the next, each castle having a

hundred windows and a throne for Anahita

and standing in a cultivated oasis. 86

Eyewitnesses have at wide intervals of time

reported the activities of just such great ladies of the steppes, riding upon their

wagons from castle to castle.87

In Asia, whoever will found an empire

must first have a palace and a city. Xenophon

himself was suspected of planning to have

his soldiers settle down and found a city

which would be named after him, from

which he could spread abroad his dynamis

in all directions.88 This was long before Alexander the Great did the same thing. It is

the immemorial Asiatic pattern. We are told

that patriarchs of the race did it in the

beginning;89 and, as late as the 1920s, the holy man Dambin Jansang built a mighty

fortress in the midst of the Gobi from which

he actually dominated all of Central Asia.90

The “characteristic Central Asiatic city,”

according to a modern observer, is a cluster

of buildings and tents about a super-palace,

built to be the administrative center of all the

vast empty spaces around. 91 Archaeology has shown this to have been the normal order

in prehistoric times, when the city was

already but an appendage of the palace, and

the palace was a combination fort, shrine,

and trading center, like any real hierocentric point. 92 All organized society was centered at that place which bore the name of “the

god, the tribe, and the capitol, where the

ancestral power was concentrated.” 93 When this fell, the empire fell too; and so we have the concept of Babylon, founded by Nimrod,

the mad hunter, the plunderer and enslaver of

all the earth, full of “beasts and sheep, and

horses, and chariots, and slaves and the

souls of men,” that perishes in a day.

Kings as Hunters and Nomads

We have remarked elsewhere that

“Kings must be Hunters. ”94 The royal hunt of

Asia is a great battue in which all the animals are driven by a converging ring of

soldiers to that spot in the very center of the contracting circle where the king sits on his

throne on a green mound. There the king

slays the beasts he chooses and gives his

“peace” to the rest, which thereby become

sacrosanct under his protection. 95 Human beings are treated in exactly the same way. A

Persian king after viewing a tremendous

animal drive significantly remarks to his

officers: “And when people regard us as enemies and neither send up soldiers nor

tribute, we hunt them with all our might! ”96

Xenophon loves to dwell on the absolute

identity of war and hunting in the Asiatic

economy (a doctrine dear to the Mongols):

the ruling nation is simply a moving army in

the field; when it is not hunting men, it is

hunting animals, and vice versa. Carpini tells how Chingis Khan “became a mighty hunter.

He learned to steal men, and to take them for prey. He ranged into other countries taking as many captives as he could, and join[ed] them

unto him,” 97 and so conquered the world.

That is exactly how the kings of Babylonia

and Assyria describe their own activities.

There is no contradiction, incidentally, in a

people being at the same time hunters and

cattle raisers. Ammianus notes, for example,

that though the Persians, Scythians, and

Alans drove their huge herds before them

wherever they went “like perpetual

fugitives,” they still lived by hunting animals and plundering humans. 98 Certainly the oldest kings of the East described their wars

as super cattle and slave raids, in which

wild beasts, domestic cattle, and human

beings are driven in common herds to the

holy palace and shrine of the god. 99

This is the old story of Nimrod, who

revolted against God, “became a hunter of

men,” and founded that abominable state from which all the kings of the earth take

their authority.100 Even Apollo was in the beginning a deadly hunter who came from the

steppes of Asia (the land of the

Hyperboreans) and slew the great serpent

that guarded the holy spring of Delphi, so

that he could gain control of the spot to

which all the Greeks brought their tribute,

and thereby became their ruler. 101 So, too, Othinn is pictured in the beginning as a

conquering nomad from the East, who rides

into new lands to conquer them, hold games,

and receive tribute; joining with the Asia-

manna, “formerly called the Aesir” (the As

or Alans), he built the castle, Sigtunir, and

held his great assembly where those twelve

judges officiated “who before had been at

Troy and were of the Turkish race. ”102 All of which points again to the steppes.

A nomad origin alone can account for

the most paradoxical aspect of all the hierocentric shrines, namely their universal

mobility. Every great shrine, while claiming

to be the very point of origin of all things,

had its founding legend telling how it was

transferred through the air from some distant

place.

Furthermore, the doctrine that the seat of

world dominion, ever since it was sent down

in the beginning from heaven, has moved

from place to place among the nations, now

centered in one city and now in another, is

stated in one of the earliest Sumerian texts;

and, following Persian patterns, enjoys great

popularity among Jewish and Christian

apocryphal writers. Related to this concept

is the universal custom requiring the king at

his coronation to found a new palace and a new city to be the center of the earth. This, again, seems the direct antithesis of belief in an ageless holy shrine marking the one and

only center of the universe; but, again, it is a doctrine that the nomads of the steppes must subscribe to. If palace-temple complexes

must be built as the only way of “binding

down” the conquered and organizing the

empire, the necessary mobility of the nomad

conquerors would force them to shift their

main center from time to time, thus producing

duplication. “Les tribus allaient de place en

place, tandis que les dieux restaient dans les sanctuaires. Il fallait s’y rendre” (tribes went from place to place, while the gods remained

in the sanctuaries);103 hence, of course, pilgrimage is still a general and natural

institution and not merely a ritual in Central Asia. That all visitors to all hierocentric

shrines must dress and act as pilgrims from

afar is a clear enough indication of the

nomadic nature of the institution.

As is well known, the oldest temples

were tents or huts of reed matting or some

other light material. The nomads of Asia still employ these light tent-temples which, like

the ark of Israel, move about with them on

their wanderings. As soon as such a temple

is set up, it promptly becomes a center of

pilgrimage. 104 Here we have a practical explanation for what, in the rest of the world, is purely ritual; namely, the setting up of a

sacred booth to serve as the main shrine

during the year-rites. Again, the fact that the Jewish writers describe the throne of God

(certainly the most stable thing in the

universe) as mounted on wheels is indeed perplexing, until one reads that the thrones of the Great Khans were likewise on wheels,

so that they could be drawn along by horses

or oxen when it came time to move the camp

(cf. fig. 11).105 The apocryphal picture of God entering paradise perfectly reproduces

the scene of the khagan arriving at the

summer kuriltai. The Almighty rides into the

glorious meadows on a huge wagon which comes to a halt under the great central tree of life, while all the people sing joyful hymns

of welcome. 106

Paradoxically enough, the idea of a

hierocentric point is far more often brought

to the minds of nomads than of sedentary

people. The royal court of the Mongols is

“called in their language horda, " says William of Rubruck, “which signifies, the

middle; because the governor or chieftain among them dwells always in the middle of

his people.” 107 Every schoolboy knows (or once knew) that the Northern king who went

into battle surrounded by concentric rings of

warriors—the “shield-wall”—was an object

of sacred trust; also that such an order of

battle is a tactical absurdity—except on the

open plains, where it has always been

standard with the kings of Asia.108 Many observers have described the meticulous

care with which the Asiatic nomads orient their camps to the four cardinal points—the

basic hierocentric idea. And what is more

natural than that wanderers over the

featureless plains should be ever concerned

with taking their bearings in the universe?

Herodotus tells us that when Asiatic

colonists went out at the command of Delphi

to found the kingdom of Libya, their leader

pointed to the spot where the new capitol

was to stand with the order: “Here we must

stop for here is the axis of heaven!” 109

Figure 11. This two-storied royal

wagon throne shows the Persian

king seated on his couch with the

crescent moon on his shoulders as

well as below him on his Sassanian silver plate (A), c. A.D. 300. The

cherubs on either side lead the four

leaping zebu upward, identifying

the king lumbering along in his

wagon with the divine movement of

the heavens.

In the same way, a statue of a

deceased Roman emperor in a

wheeled temple is pulled by four

elephants in a procession

commemorating his deification, as

shown by the welcoming reception

of the gods above, on this ivory

panel (B), A.D. 425-450. The

popularity of this circus parade is

shown by the abundance of

commemorative coins: (C) brass

coin of Faustina Antonini, (D)

sertertius of Titus, (E) coin of

Domitian.

The institution of the Royal Progress in which the monarch moves like the beneficent

sun in a tireless round among his people is

another Asiatic practice. The Persian kings

were constantly on the move between their

various summer and winter palaces, and

medieval travelers have described how all

of Central Asia migrated with the seasons.

This is simply the necessary seasonal

nomadism of the grass-seeking cattle people,

and the Royal Progress is really royal

nomadism. 110

The proper business of all kings, when

not sitting on the throne, is war and the hunt, both requiring the nomadic way of life.

Tournaments and fairs are no less an

occasion for camping out; and even when the

king must live indoors, his palace walls,

covered with tapestries and skins, are made

to look as tentlike as possible.111 Indeed the royal throne, like the royal bed (which in

Asia is identical with it), 112 ordinarily stands under a canopy which is nothing but a

“Turkish” tent. 113 “A recent discovery,”

writes Gadd, “has revealed that the later

Assyrians described their earliest princes as

‘kings living in tents,’ and the same phrase,

occurring at the end of Babylonian history . .

. indicates that this means chieftains of desert tribes. ”114 This background the kings never lost. To the kings of Asia the royal tent is as much a part of the insignia as is the crown.

Tamerlane in the West and the Chinese

emperors in the East115 built their magnificent palaces to resemble their

ancestral tents (cf. fig. 10, p. 105). The

tentlike character of the Achaemenid palaces

was carried over into the mosques of the

Near East and the cathedrals of Europe, so

that the great domed structures that sprang up all over the world in the Middle Ages

appear both in form and decoration to be

reproductions of the great royal yurts of the plains (cf. fig. 12). 116

The arts and treasures that royalty has

always coveted are the arts and treasures of

the nomads—textiles, jewelry, arms,

animals, and slaves—all highly portable and

instantly redeemable. 117 Louis XI, for all his absolutism, was despised by other monarchs

as being “not royal,” because as a European

he saw where his true wealth lay. An Asiatic

king, who must spend his whole life on the

move, must carry the wealth of his kingdom

on his back, so to speak, if he is to enjoy it; and this is the type of royal display that

passed throughout the world as kingly. The

highest expression of royal splendor is the

court with its endless feasting and hunting

and its display of gorgeous bric-a-brac

looted by a nobility whose whole life is a

military campaign. It might even be said that

the Renaissance was the rediscovery of the

sedentary arts—painting, sculpture, pottery,

books, architecture—as against the nomadic

arts of the Middle Ages, such as bardic

poetry, weaving, jewelry, arms, pageantry,

and so forth.

Figure 12. "Measuring once the

breadth between the wheel-ruts of

one of their carts, I found it to be

twenty feet over: I counted twenty-

two oxen in one team, the axletree

of the cart was of huge size, like the

mast of a ship. And a fellow stood in the door of the house, upon the

forestall of the cart, driving the

oxen."--William of Rubruck, c.

1250.

In the background, we can see the

various stages of erecting the

traditional yurt, still used today,

from the placing of the sacred

wheel frame of the smoke-hole, to

the lattice supports of the felt

pieces that form the tent itself. All

of the work is done by women, of

course.

It is in Central Asia alone that chivalry

and feudalism, like court ritual, have

survived to our day. 118 And they are found there in the beginning. From the first, the

conquerors of Asia brought the conquered

under control by forcing them to farm and by

building castles to watch them. The only free men are the lords, who alone may hunt or

even mount a horse. 119 They are allowed freedom of motion because they are bound to

the monarch by solemn oaths—the code of

chivalry is an arrangement by which a

nomadic aristocracy is recruited (often from

conquered enemies) and kept in leash while

being allowed its freedom and enjoying the

service and support of grounded serfs.

Goetze has shown that chivalry and

feudalism are the normal products of Central

Asian economy, whence all the great empires

of the second millennium B.C. adopted

them.120 The system was taken over in the West, along with the chivalric and heraldic

devices that still betray their origin by their Asiatic nomenclature, at the time when

Europe, overrun by the wild hordes of Asia,

was itself simply a western extension of the

great Asiatic system. It never worked very

well in Europe, however, as Tennyson wistfully observes, and whenever the

Europeans came in contact with the real

Asiatics, the latter were shocked and

disgusted at the laxness, treachery, jangling, and hypocrisy that made European chivalry,

even for intelligent Europeans, a most

obvious farce.

The typical royal court is Asiatic in its

rites and appointments. In the Western world

those hunting parks which may not be

missing from the seats of royalty are but

feeble imitations at best of the stupendous

paradises of the East. Europeans, familiar

with the courts of the West, were simply

overawed in the presence of the Great

Khans. Their courts were crude and

barbaric, but they were the real thing. The

khan himself sat utterly majestic and aloof on his high throne in the dim half-light of the

great dome (and what else could have

inspired the Byzantine emperors to have their thrones hoisted up by derricks to the

ceiling?). “Upon the right hand of the great

Khan sits his first-be-gotten son and heir . . .

and under him sit all the nobles of blood

royal. There are also four secretaries, which

put all things in writing that the emperor

speaks. In his presence likewise stand

barons and others of his nobility, with great

trains of followers after them, of whom none

dare speak so much as one word . . . except

his jesters and stage-players, who are

appointed of purpose to solace their lord. . .

. All his barons present themselves before

him, with wreaths and crowns upon their

heads . . . some of them are in green, namely

the principal; the second are in red, and third in yellow, and they hold each man in his

hand a little ivory tablet of elephant’s tooth, and they are girt with golden girdles half a

foot broad, and they stand upon their feet

keeping silence.” At a given signal, all fall upon their faces and touch their foreheads to

the earth. Around the walls the nobility are

arranged in tiers of thrones or benches,

proximity to the emperor being proportionate

to rank. A host of musicians hymn the

monarch’s praise with ceaseless and

terrifying din. 121

If the king on his throne is doing his best

to imitate God on His, 122 we must allow the khans of Asia first prize among earthly

monarchs. Here is no sad and puerile

Byzantine masquerading, but an expression

of tangible power: the mechanical lions of

Constantinople were real lions before the throne of the khan. There can be no doubt

that it is the Asiatic model that is followed in the apocryphal descriptions of the heavenly

court, and the Byzantine court that served as

the model for all of Europe was itself

consciously copied from the East. The

livery, for example, which is little more than a pretty conceit in the courts of Europe, has a profound significance among the nomads, as

do the chivalric banners that go with it. 123

When the Easter chorus in Constantinople

joyfully announces that the heads of the

emperor’s enemies are heaped up before his

feet, it is not difficult to detect a wishful

imitation of the Grand Khan, for the

collection of heads and scalps for the king

was immemorial routine on the steppes.

As the king sits in state at the New Year

(and every throne-day is but a repetition of

the New Year’s rites), 124 all the world must bring its tribute and lay it at his feet. In return the king must pour out rich gifts without

measure, for he is the lord of abundance and

all things are his. The staggering turnover of property in the form of gifts received and

bestowed has been the ruin of many a

European court; but it is sound economic

policy in a nation whose whole existence is an endless campaign of looting and where it

is convenient to dispose of recent plunder to

another in all possible haste. The normal

economy of the “barbarians” runs down,

says Jordanes, as soon as loot stops coming

in; 125 and Bar Hebraeus has given a vivid description of the ruin of a court when its

noble members abandoned their customary

raids and filibusters. 126

The Two Kingdoms

Highly characteristic of the hierocentric

doctrine is an utter abhorrence of all that lies outside the system. The world inevitably

falls into two parts, the heavenly kingdom

and the outer darkness, a world of monsters

and abortions. Whoever is not of the frithr is a nithung, without rights and without humanity. All who do not willingly submit to

Alexander or Constantine are, according to Dio Chrysostom and Eusebius, mad beasts to

be hunted down and exterminated. For the

Roman, all the world is either ager pacatus or ager hosticus, says Varro,127 the only alternative to submission being outrageous

rebellion. Anyone who resents the Roman

yoke is a guilty slave, says Claudian,128 who should be consumed by remorse of

conscience. For the Moslem, all the world is

either Dār al-Islām or Dār al Ḥarb, the latter being any spot in the world that has

refused to pay tribute and thereby made itself guilty of rebellion, because everything in the world without exception is the legitimate

property of the Moslems. 129 We have already noted the claim of the khans that whoever

resisted them was guilty of crime against

God. To Attila, those who resisted his yoke

were runaway slaves,130 and the Assyrian kings constantly declare that whoever will

not take and keep an oath to them must needs be exterminated as “wicked people” and

“rebels.” In a word, “the world without the

‘Kingdom’ remains in its state of primordial

rebellion,” and all who do not recognize the

divine king are truly “children of

destruction.” 131

Here we have the root of that dualism so

characteristic of Asian theology and

commonly associated with Persia.

The doctrine is no mere abstraction,

however; it is a condition of survival among

the nomads of the steppes. Farmers may and

must live in pax, i.e., agreement, pact, compromise;132 and, when they occupy a region, they divide off the land—annually

and by lot, as a rule—and each proceeds to

cultiver son jardin (tend his garden) in a way that absorbs all his thought and energy.

But when nomads clash on the open steppe,

one or the other must be utterly subjected. A

beaten enemy at large is free to recoup his strength, bide his time, and by a lucky chance or ruse overthrow his erstwhile conqueror—

a thing that has happened a thousand times in

the history of the tribes. An independent

chief is therefore aut Caesar aut nihil; the alternative to conquering is to be a slave.

“Instant submission or annihilation” is the

formula, and every pastoral lord sends forth

his challenge to all the world: “either fight

me or submit to me.” By absorbing the

armies of the enemy, enslaving some and

binding others to him by sacred oaths, the

world conqueror builds up his world-host; “I

counted them among my people,” is the

Assyrian expression. For there must be one people only: “With the Mongols,” says Bar

Hebraeus, “there is neither slave nor free;

neither believer nor pagan; neither Christian

nor Jew; but they regard all men as

belonging to one and the same stock. . . . All

they demand is strenuous service and submission which is beyond the power (of

man to render). ”133 The alternative to one rule on the steppes is not only chaos but

sheer nonsense. Nomads cannot be held to

boundaries, and where more than one ruler

exists, they follow whom they will and life

becomes the intolerable anarchy to which

each great conqueror boasts that he has at

last put an end—invariably describing

himself as the liberator of the human race

from depraved pretenders and the restorer of

order in the world.

A natural product of this necessary

absolutism is the notorious cruelty of the

Asiatic princes which, often found in men of

magnanimous and even gentle nature, seems

to the Western mind nothing short of

pathological. But what is one to do when a

foe is not beaten until he has lost his

mobility? Where oaths can be trusted, they

suffice; where adequate supervision is possible, it is enough. For the rest, the only sure ways of immobilizing a dangerous

enemy are by beheading, maiming, blinding,

or mass transportation. The remarkable thing

is that the great conquerors rarely harm a

hair of anyone of whose submission they are

certain and always protest their preference

for gentle and philanthropic methods. It is

invariably the revolted cities and tribes, who have violated the trust and forfeited the faith of the king, that pay the terrible penalties.

Moreover, the kings of Asia were sincere in

believing that those who opposed them were

less than human, 134 and ages of experience justified their conviction that no creature on the loose is to be regarded as harmless while

it is free to do harm if it will.

The conquering nomad must of necessity

either carry all his loot with him or deposit it at guarded stations, in either case involving a

serious problem of transportation and manpower. Yet whatever is left behind and

unguarded may, and almost surely will, be

used against the conqueror by some rival or

rebel; so there is nothing for it but to destroy the stuff. The Mohammedan law orders that

prisoners and loot of war may not be left

behind or mutilated, but if they cannot be

carried home, they must be destroyed—

killed or burned.135 The Huns “obliterated and smashed everything that lay in their

route,” but they did so reluctantly, for they

almost lost a battle with the Goths rather than give up the vast burden of looted goods that

was impeding their motions. 136 Many have commented on the inconsistency of princes in

combining a passion for collecting beautiful

things with an absolute indifference to the

destruction of beautiful things. It is clearly a heritage of the steppes, where the apparent

paradox makes perfectly good sense. All

observers have commented on the single-minded devotion of the Asiatic nomads to the

accumulation of treasures (as nomads they

are hungry for such things); but when their

own survival is at stake, the stuff becomes

dangerous impedimenta to be destroyed out

of hand.

At any period of history the two top

hierocentric states may be seen damning

each other as Antichrist and resembling each

other like two peas. In the classic duel

between Justinian and Chosroes, George of

Pisidia describes the court ceremonial of

Persia as a carbon copy of that of

Constantinople, with the explanation that the

Oriental version is but a hideous parody of

the real thing. Chosroes replied in kind.137

This doctrine of the Two Kingdoms is

already full-blown in the old Babylonian

New Year’s hymn, Enuma Elish, in which the evil court of Tiamat is described as a

perfect reflection—in reverse—of the heavenly court of Anu. Emperors, caliphs,

shāhanshāhs, grand khans, popes, and kings were all at one time or another paired off

against each other as rival world rulers;

while each, within his own sphere, “had to

eliminate rival contenders” for his office.

Always, the drama is described by their

constituents as the cosmic combat between

light and darkness, heaven and hell, between

two opposing ideologies, antithetical ways

of life while, in reality, they are identical.138

They are identical because they are

hierocentric—and that is a concept which

seems almost incapable of any variety: it is

always the same.

A Western Heritage

With the decline of the Roman Empire,

Europe became a battleground of the tribes:

“propter Gallorum terras graviter inter se decertati sunt” (they fought bitterly among

themselves for the lands of the Gauls).139

Gibbon has told best of all the story of how

the “pastoral kings” of the steppes fought

each other for the control of the newly

opened lands of the West, exactly as they had

fought for their Asiatic grazing lands; and

how the native populations were either

driven like cattle (a favorite term with

contemporary writers) or allowed to live on

as serfs, meekly submitting to one haughty

lord after another. The most powerful of

these tribes, the Huns—“expeditum

indomitumque hominum genus” (an

unencumbered and untamed race of men)140

—under the mighty Attila, “barbariam totam

tenens” (master of the whole non-Roman

world), 141 treated Europe simply as a western province of their Asiatic empire.

Attila’s son Dinzio did, on European soil,

exactly what every Asiatic aspirant had done before him in Asia; he rallied the remnants

of the tribes about him, and tried to seize a

city in Pannonia in an attempt to restore his

father’s Imperium. 142 A later descendant of Attila, Mundo, is even more typical, for he

went into the most desert part of Europe and

there, like Tamerlane and Chingis Khan,

gathered a band of outcasts about him, no

doubt making the most of his descent. He had

them proclaim him king and declared war on

the world, choosing as his base of operations

a tower on the Danube which was called

Herta—obviously the later Mongol Horda,

“the center” of dominion.143 These men, typical feudal barons, were transplanting the

ways of the steppes into the West.

The West had long been preparing to

receive them, too. Generations of fighting

against Alans, Gepids, Goths, and Huns, and

of fighting with them shoulder to shoulder, in

alliance now with one and now with the other, had transformed the Roman military

state into the thing it had been fighting.

Narses consciously and successfully

employed not Roman but Hunnish tactics

against the Franks, and the closing chapters

of Jordanes show a Roman army

indistinguishable from any barbarian horde.

The last chapter of all makes the significant

remark that the ultimate victor to emerge

from the world shambles was “victor

gentium diversarum Justinianus Imperator”

(the Emperor Justinian, conqueror of diverse

peoples). It was in this man Justinian that the Huns won a great and abiding victory over

the West.

The Emperor Justinian displayed at all

times a single-minded devotion to the Huns

that puzzles and dismays historians.144

Apparently there was nothing he would not

do to please the Huns, even to the wrecking

of his own foreign policy145 and the ruination of trade and agriculture throughout the

empire. 146 A passionate devotee of the factionists, he had worn their Persian beards, Hunnish hairdo, Hunnish cloaks, Hunnish

shirts, and Hunnish shoes, 147 the girdles and brooches of the steppes having already

supplanted the more civilized styles of the

West. 148 “The greatest destroyer of established institutions that ever lived,” 149

Justinian was determined to make the

Western world “completely change its

clothes”; 150 and he succeeded.

All the absurdities and contradictions in

his policies vanish if we consider that this

Illyrian, who hated Greek things, was set

upon becoming a grand khan. Justinian

handed over the wealth of the state to the

Huns “who were always turning up” at court

(a significant note) in ever increasing

numbers. 151 He would claim for himself all the private property of the citizens, either

charging the Romans with a crime or

pretending that it was all being brought in to him as gifts, 152 and then promptly give it all away again to the Hunnish lords before his

throne:153 a thing that made perfectly good sense to his visitors from the steppes but

appeared to his Roman subjects as “a thing

that had never happened since the beginning

of time. ”154 What he did not thus throw away to the barbarians, says Procopius, he wasted

on absurd buildings, 155 constructed simply to outshine all other emperors—a thing that any

khan would have understood. This Hun-

worship actually amounted to the enslaving

of the empire, says Procopius and Agathias,

but that was how Justinian wanted it. He

insisted that all his subjects, from top to

bottom, be called his slaves, 156 and instituted the strictly Central Asiatic style of

prostration and foot-kissing.157 He was not averse to giving the impression of being a

sort of super-shaman and apparently even

adopted the well-known Mongol custom of

making those who entered his presence step

clear of the threshold.158 In short, “instead of acting like a Roman Emperor, he was the

complete barbarian in language, dress, and

thought.” 159 What more could one ask? The welcome barbarians poured into court from

all directions, to the immense delight of the

emperor, who never failed to send them

away loaded with gold, 160 till presently “the barbarians in general became complete

masters of the wealth of the Romans.” 161 In the end, all the offices and officials of the

state were supplanted by one office—the

royal court, and by two persons—the

emperor and empress,162 for the new ascendancy of the empress, intensely

resented by Procopius, was the crowning

Asiatic touch.

Justinian’s weird innovations were no

ephemeral thing. They were but the

culmination of that process of Asianizing

which had been deplored by the poets of the

Republic. And they were there to stay.

Diehls, and indeed the ancients themselves,

see in Justinian the perfect type and model of the true Byzantine monarch, and his court

became the model for every court of Europe.

The sedentary populations of the empire,

strictly forbidden to adopt the wandering

ways of the conquerors, were permanently

saddled with an adventurous hunting and

campaigning nobility. How utterly

unworkable the system was is vividly

described by Fulcher, who shows how in

time it led inevitably to the Crusades. 163 In the Crusades we find the nobility of the West

employing all the devices and insignia of the

Asiatics with accustomed familiarity, so that

Edward I can arrange for a coordinated invasion operation with his Mongol allies

down to the smallest detail. The Europeans

fully understood all the gadgets of the East

and were as enthusiastic for a life of raiding and adventure as any Bedouin. But the good

side of the Asiatic system completely

escaped them.

Christianity added nothing to the

hierocentric doctrine as such. The early

Christian theology was keenly conscious of

all the imagery of hierocentric rule and ritual and, above all, of the contrast of the two

kingdoms. The Apostles, the Apostolic

Fathers, Diognetus, Tertullian, and the

Shepherd of Hermas tell us, it is true, that

there is a universal throne—but it is not on

this earth. The devil is the “Prince of this

World,” which is no place for the children of

the kingdom—they sojourn here as pilgrims

and as strangers. The conflict is not between

contending parties here below, but between

“this world” and the other. Our heritage and

kingdom lie beyond: “here we have no

abiding kingdom.”

Later Christian teaching adopted the old

hierocentric doctrine with enthusiasm; but it

did not, as Ferrero boasts, 164 make it more spiritual and intellectual: the lofty ideal of the sacred universal empire is as abstract

and intellectual in Horace and Vergil as it is in Dante. The vision of the universal ruler

seated at the center of the cosmos had been

fully appreciated and ecstatically

proclaimed by the theoreticians of

Alexandria in whose steps Roman emperors

and Christian thinkers willingly followed.165

Gilson, commenting on Pope John VIII’s

concept of the church, says that it was

identical with the Roman Empire, having the

same capital and the same idea, only plus

vaste. 166 But what could be more vaste than

the urbs aequaeva polo (city coeval with the heavens) of the pagan panegyrists, equal to

the universe itself? Diehl sees in Christianity the addition of a profoundly religious

element to the old concept of the Imperium: the prince is “transformed into the elect of

God.” But what Cosmocrator was ever

anything but just that?

In describing the new world church as

an improvement on the old system, each of

these three authorities admits the Church’s

indebtedness to that system. The absolute

predominance of the emperor, “equal to the

Apostles” (isapostolos), God on earth, the supreme head of the church as well as the

state;167 the great imperial councils, a thing new in the church but, as Gelzer and Batiffol

have shown, established usage in the empire;

the investiture of church-men by the emperor

with insignia originally confined to the

secular administration and borrowed from

the East;168 the new ritual and liturgy so closely akin to old court ceremonies—the

laudes echoing the old imperial acclamation and the liturgies praising God in the same set terms which the panegyrists declaimed

before the emperor; the emergence of Christ,

the ever-victorious crusher of his foes, as an object of terror and dread169—such are a few of the well-documented indications that

the world church of the fourth century was

built upon the firm foundation of the old

sacral kingship. The Armenian monk Vartan

says the Christians prostrated themselves

before God as the Mongols did before the

Grand Khan. 170 A trip to Constantinople would have shown him that this pious

prostration was not reserved for the

Invisible God but was really the old

emperor-worship of Central Asia.

To Conclude

That it was the people of the steppes,

engulfing the great “peripheral” civilizations in wave after wave, who imposed

government upon the world, Oppenheimer

long ago made clear. What he failed to

observe is that hunters do not always “work best alone or in small groups,” but on the

boundless plains have been wont to operate

in vast communal battues from the

beginning. More recently Goetze has

completed the picture in describing how the

Hurrians and their kind came out of the

regions of the North at the end of the third

millennium and taught the old city-states to

become world empires, supplying them with

the equipment for the task: the horse, the

chariot, the mounted archer, and a

thoroughgoing feudalism. 171

In China, India, Egypt, and Europe the

successive waves of nomad invasion have

been like recurrent attacks of a disease, each effecting a permanent change in the organism

and leaving a permanent deposit behind it.

The invaded civilizations, having absorbed

institutions and traditions of the invaders,

become increasingly susceptible to the

romantic appeal of the same, and in some

cases (e.g., Russia) contact between the two

worlds is never broken completely.

During the darkest period of its history,

when all the works of established

civilization were virtually destroyed, the

West reverted to a state of primordial chaos

indistinguishable from that which normally

prevails on the steppes of Asia. At that fatal moment the liquefied resources of the West

were poured, as they had often been before,

into the Asian mold. The obvious solution to

the Asiatic predicament was the classic

Asiatic solution: with appalling meekness

the officials of the empire literally kissed the

earth before the feet of worthless and arrogant emperors, while pastoral

conquerors settled down to establish their

accustomed economy of theft and tribute on

the newly won soil of Europe.

This is the dangerous heritage of the

hierocentric state. Removed from those

boundless land-spaces which gave it rise

and which alone offer boundless empire, the

hierocentric ideal becomes in practice a

pretentious ritual, pontificale et vide

(pretentious and empty); but in theory a

noble dogma, a pure idea of such compelling

logic, simplicity, boldness, and universal

appeal as to appear nothing short of a

revelation from heaven. The great Greeks,

like the prophets and apostles, saw through

the imposing fraud: “God never meant that

one man should rule all of cattle-raising

Asia,” says the ghost of Darius, addressing

at once the Eastern and Western worlds from

the stage of Athens. But the shallower minds of the schoolmen were lost in ecstatic

contemplation of the universal king around

whom all things revolve in perfect circles.

No less so the schoolmen of the Middle

Ages, “cabined in the Absolute,” hypnotized

by the overwhelming authority of the One.

And so, too, the schoolmen of our own day.

Toynbee is confident that “religion is likely

to be the plane on which this coming

centripetal [we would say, hierocentric]

counter-movement will first declare itself,”

and recommends above all else the study of

“the part which the west has played in the

unification of mankind.” 172

In the last chapter of his Histoire des

Croisades, Grousset has shown how Western Europe, at the peak of its intellectual

splendor, utterly failed to comprehend the

enlightened world views of the Mongol

khans who, strongly favoring Christianity in

their own lands, were all but begging for an alliance with the Christian West by which the

two could crush Islam. Significantly enough,

it was the vision of world-rule itself that

frustrated action. The cardinals who cross-

examined Rabban Sauma would not hear of

an alliance that might seem to march against

the Antichrist under any other banner—

Nestorian or Mongol—than their own. In

A.D. 297, the Emperor Galerius haughtily

rejected a generous offer of the Persians to

divide the rule of the world as equals, East

and West, and thus preserve the peace; the

Romans, says Petrus Patricius, simply could

not conceive of such a proposition as

anything but sarcasm or malice. When the

Persian ambassadors pointed out the risk and

folly of rejecting such a golden offer, the

furious emperor shouted: “The custom of my

ancestors has been to spare those who

submit and make war on those who

don’t!” 173 That was all. It would seem that nothing can so effectively block “the

unification of mankind” as that very

religious” centripetal counter movement” for

which Toynbee yearns, and that the West has

been less the author of such unification than

its consistent wrecker.

Men seem unable to leave the dream of

a hierocentric state alone. To recapitulate the sections given above, we cannot blame

people if they yearn for (1) the grandeur,

color, and unity of the great assembly, (2) the lofty and uncompromising certainty of

universal kingship, (3) the sense of refuge

and well-being in the holy shrine, (4) the

high and independent life of a chivalrous

aristocracy, (5) the luxury of hating all

opposition with a holy hatred, and (6) the

sheer authority of the institutions established and maintained by force. These are the

strengths of the hierocentric state. Its

weakness is that it doesn’t exist. That “son of the morning” who went up into the North,

placed his throne upon the mountain of the

assembly, and said, “I will be like the most

High,” only succeeded, we are told in

“weaken[ing] the nations” (Isaiah 14:14,

12).

Notes

This article was originally published

in Western Political Quarterly 4/2 (1951): 226-53.

Footnotes

^1. Martin P. Nilsson, Geschichte der griechischen Religion, 2 vols. (Munich: Beck, 1941), 1:778-79.

^2. Samuel H. Hooke, ed., The Labyrinth (London: Society for Promoting Christian

Knowledge, 1937); and Theodor H. Gaster,

Thespis: Ritual, Myth, and Drama in the Ancient Near East (New York: Schuman,

1950), are general treatments of the subject.

See below for other references.

^3. For a general treatment of the year-feast, see Hugh Nibley, “Sparsiones,” Classical

Journal 40 (1945): 515-38; reprinted in this volume, pages 148-62.

^4. See Wolfgang Golther’s note in his edition of Ari’s Íslending-abók (Halle: Niemeyer, 1923), 11-12; also Paul Herrmann, Island in Vergangenheit und Gegenwart, 2 vols.

(Leipzig: Engelmann, 1907-10), 1:302-3;

Felix Niedner, Islands Kultur zur

Wikingerzeit (Jena: Diederichs, 1913), 45-47.

^5. Adam of Bremen, Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum (History of the

Archbishops of Hamburg-Bremem) IV, 26-

27; Paul Herrmann, Nordische Mythologie

(Leipzig: Engelmann, 1903), 300, 501; and

Paul B. Du Chaillu, The Viking Age, 2 vols.

(New York: Scribner, 1890), 1:296.

^6. On the time, place, and nature of these

assemblies, see Alexander Tille, Yule and Christmas: Their Place in the Germanic

Year (London: Nutt, 1899), 47-48, 71; Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, tr. James S.

Stallybrass, 3 vols. (London: Sonnenschein

& Allen, 1880), 1:66-87; Herrmann,

Nordische Mythologie, 497-99, 503-4, 509; Carl Clemen, Religionsgeschichte Europas,

2 vols. (Heidelberg: Winter, 1926), 1:355-61;

Tacitus, Annals X, 51; Thietmar Merseburg, Chronicon I, 17, in Robert Holtzmann, ed., Die Chronik des Bischofs Thietmar von

Merseburg und ihre Korveier

Überarbeitung, vol. 6, part 9, of

Monumenta Germaniae Historica (Berlin: Weidmann, 1955); and numerous references

in the sagas, especially Finnur Jónsson,

Egils Saga Skalgrímssonar (Halle:

Niemeyer, 1924). The classic study of the

survival of the old Germanic assemblies in

the Middle Ages are Charles Du Cange’s

dissertations, “Des assemblées solenelles des

rois de France” and “Des cours et des festes

solenelles des roys de France,” in

Glossarium Mediae et Infimae Latinitatis, 10 vols. (Paris: Didot, 1850), 7:15-23.

^7. John Rhys, Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion as Illustrated by Celtic Heathendom (London: Williams and

Norgate, 1898), 192. Another such stone, “a

petra quadrata in ora fontis,” is described in the Book of Armagh, in Ioannes Zwicker, ed., Fontes Historiae Religionis Celticae

(Berlin: de Gruyter, 1934), 2:154. The stone

of Tara was moved to Tailtiu when that

became the capital, Rhys, Lectures on the

Origin and Growth of Religion, 207, 576, 585. See also Henri Hubert, “Le culte des

heros et ses conditions sociales,” RHR 70

(1914): 12, 15; and 71 (1915): 208-9; Henri

Hubert, Greatness and Decline of the Celts (London: Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1934),

241-42, and L. D. Agate, “Pilgrimage,” in

James Hastings, Encyclopaedia of Religion

and Ethics, 13 vols. (New York: Scribner, 1928), 10:21.

^8. Henry d’Arbois de Jubainville, The Irish Mythological Cycle and Celtic Mythology,

tr. Richard Best (Dublin: Hodges, Figgis, 1903), 3; Hubert, Greatness and Decline of the Celts, 1-4, 242; Rhys, Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion, 409, 460, 514-17, 519-20, 459-60, 412, 581, 608,

614; J. A. MacCulloch, Celtic Mythology,

vol. 3 in Louis H. Gray, ed., Mythology of All Races, 13 vols. (Boston: Jones, 1918), 28, 34-36; Hadrian Allcroft, The Circle and the Cross, 2 vols. (London: Macmillan, 1927-30), 2:73, 20, 207.

^9. Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum No.

4039K, cited in Allcroft, Circle and the

Cross, 1:299; cf. Strabo, Geography XII, 5, 1.

^10. British assemblies described in a letter from Gregorius Magnus (Gregory the Great),

Epistolae (Epistles) XI, 77, in PL 77:1215-16; at the Council of Cloveshove, A.D. 747,

in Joannes D. Mansi, Sacrorum Concilorum

Nova et Amplissima Collectio, 31 vols.

(Graz: Akademische, 1901), 12:400; by

Geoffrey of Monmouth, Historia Regum

Britanniae III, 5; see especially the Welsh

version, tr. Acton Griscom (London: Longmans, Green, 1929), IX, 1; III, 3. The

year-drama is described by Rhys, Lectures

on the Origin and Growth of Religion, 155-58, 160-65, 562; cf. Mary Williams, “An

Early Ritual Poem in Welsh,” Speculum 13

(1938): 43-51; and Raymond W. Muncey,

Our Old English Fairs (London: Sheldon, 1935), 46, 103, 116, 145-47, 156, 162-63,

166.

^11. General descriptions: Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 34 (150-52); Venatius Fortunatus, Vita Sancti Amantii X, 108-10, in PL 88:522-23; Strabo, Geography IV, 3, 2-3; V, 11, 1; Gregory of Tours, De Gloria Confessorum 11, in PL 71:836-37; Rhys, Lectures on the Origin and Growth of

Religion, 383-86, 390, 394-96, 407-9, 419-21, 429.

^12. Cicero, In Verrem III, 48, 106-7; LIII, 117-18.

^13. André Piganiol, “Les origines du forum,”

Melanges de l’École de France de Rome 28

(1928): 250-51, 271-72, 276-78; Stefan

Weinstock, “Templum,” Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archäologischen Instituts.

Römische Abteilung 45 (1930): 118. On the mundus as the model of the universe, J.-A.

Hild, “Mundus,” in Charles V. Daremberg

and Edmond Saglio, Dictionnaire des

antiquités grecques et romaines, 6 vols. in 10 (Paris: Hachette, 1877-1919), 3:2:2021-22; and Wilhelm Kroll, “Mundus,” in RE

16:560-64.

^14. The basic descriptions in Zosimus, Historia Nova II, 5-6; the Acta Ludorum

Saecularium in Theodor Mommsen,

Gesammelte Schriften, 8 vols. (Berlin: Weidmann, 1905-13), 8:572-73, 598-99;

Statius, Silvae I, 6; Ovid, Fasti III, 525-30; Cassiodorus, Variae VIII, 33. See especially André Piganiol, Recherches sur les jeux

Romains (Strasbourg: Librairie Istra, 1923); E. Diehls, “Das Saeculum, seine Riten und Gebete,” Rheinisches Museum für

Philologie 81 (1934): 256-58; Georg

Wissowa, “De Feriis Anni Romanorum

Vetustissimi Observationes Selectae,” in

Gesammelte Abhandlungen zur römischen Religions- und Stadtgeschichte (Munich: Beck, 1904), 154-74; Otto Huth, Janus

(Bonn: Rohrscheid, 1932); Fritz Blumenthal,

“Ludi Saeculares,” Klio 15 (1917-18): 232.

^15. Plutarch, Quaestiones Graecae no. 12, in William R. Halliday, The Greek Questions of Plutarch (Oxford: Clarendon, 1928), 72; also 9, 35, and 59.

^16. Nilsson, Geschichte der griechischen Religion, 1:778-82; and Martin P. Nilsson, Griechische Feste (Leipzig: Teubner, 1906), 156-57, 319, n. 1; Paul Stengel, Die

griechischen Kultusaltertümer (Munich: Beck, 1920), 190-216.

^17. Jane Harrison, Themis (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1912), 389-96

(Delphi); cf. also Francis M. Cornford’s

study on Olympia, “The Origin of the

Olympic Games,” in ibid., 212-59, and

Gilbert Murray, “An Excursus on the Ritual

Forms Preserved in Greek Tragedy,” in

ibid., 341-63.

^18. Clemen, Religionsgeschichte Europas,

1:374-77, 386-87. Descriptions of the various assemblies in Karl H. Meyer, ed.,

Fontes Historiae Religionis Slavicae

(Berlin: de Gruyter, 1931), 7, 35 (Ebbo), 63-

64, 66-67 (Dlugosz), 70, 77, 94-95 (Ibn

Rusta). Cf. Jan Machal, Slavic Mythology,

vol. 3 in Gray, Mythology of All Races, 279-80, 286-87, 281-84, 295, 305, 307-9, 311-

12, and A. Brueckner, “Slaven und Litauer,”

in Alfred Bertholet and Edvard Lehmann,

eds., Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte, 2

vols., 4th ed. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1925),

2:510-21; Helmold, Chronicle of the Slavs I, 16; 52; 69; and 83.

^19. Hermann Kees, Ägypten, in Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft, vol. 3, pt. 1, 3a (Munich: Beck, 1933), 28, 175, 177-78,

195; Adolf Erman, Ägypten und ägyptisches

Leben in Altertum (Tübingen: Mohr, 1923), 41, 59-60, 294; Arthur Weigall, History of the Pharaohs, 2 vols. (London: Butterworth, 1931), 1:118.

^20. C. N. Deedes, “The Labyrinth,” in Hooke, The Labyrinth, 3-5, 13-14; Fritz Hommel,

Ethnologie und Geographie des alten Orients (Munich: Beck, 1926), 882-83, 761-63, 935-38, 939-41, 948, 955-56; Kees,

Ägypten, 155-58; see especially H. R. Hall, Review of Adriaan de Buck, De Egyptische

voorstellungen betreffende den oerheuvel, in JEA 10 (1924): 185-87.

^21. On the rites: Plutarch, Isis and Osiris; Herodotus, History II, 58-65; Deedes,

“Labyrinth,” 3-42; Hugo Gressmann, Tod

und Auferstehung des Osiris nach

Festbräuchen und Umzügen (Leipzig:

Hinrichs, 1923).

^22. Richard F. Burton, Guidebook to Meccah (London: Philpot, 1924), 54.

^23. Ibid., 32, 43-44; Christiaan S. Hurgronje, Het Mekkaansche feest (Leiden: Brill, 1899); Julius Wellhausen, Reste arabischen

Heidentums (Berlin: Reimer, 1897), 84-94.

Arabic literature is full of the great

assemblies of men, jinns, animals, birds, and

so forth, the most impressive treatment of

the theme being in the text edited by

Friedrich Dieterici, Thier und Mensch vor

dem König der Genien (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1881), passim.

^24. Aubrey R. Johnson, “The Role of the King in the Jerusalem Cultus,” in Hooke,

Labyrinth, 73-77; and also Eric Burrows,

“Some Cosmological Patterns in Babylonian

Religion,” in ibid., 53-56; A. J. Wensinck,

“The Semitic New Year and the Origin of

Eschatology,” Acta Orientalia 1 (1922): 158, 176; Julius Wellhausen, Prolegomena

to the History of Israel, tr. J. Sutherland Black and Allan Menzies (Edinburgh: Black,

1885), 17-28, 103-8; Alfred Jeremias, Das

Alte Testament im Lichte des alten Orients (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1916), 647-48. That

there was originally only one festival, see

Albert Brock-Utne, “Eine

religionsgeschichtliche Studie zu dem

ursprünglichen Passahopfer,” Archiv für

Religionswissenschaft 31 (1934): 272-78.

^25. “Our Ras Shamra text affords the prototype of New Year rituals still surviving in

Jerusalem in the 6th century B.C.,” says

Theodor H. Gaster, “Ras Shamra, 1929-

39,” Antiquity 13 (1939): 316. Widely identified with other rites by Theodor H.

Gaster, “The Story of Aqhat, I,” Studi e

Materiali di Storia delle Religioni 12

(1936): 127-32. See especially Lucian, De

Syria Dea (On the Syrian Goddess).

^26. E.g., that at Abraham’s Oak in Mamre, Sozomen, Historia Ecclesiastica

(Ecclesiastical History) II, 4, in PG 67:941-44, and Eusebius, Vita Constantini (The

Life of Constantine) III, 53, in PG 20:1116.

^27. Burrows, “Some Cosmological Patterns,”

46-57; Heinrich Zimmern, Das

babylonische Neujahrsfest (Leipzig:

Hinrichs, 1926); Jeremias, Das Alte

Testament, 6-34, 65-87. For the Sumerian version, Morris Jastrow, Jr., “Sumerian and

Akkadian Views of Beginnings,” JAOS 36

(1916): 276-78.

^28. William F. Albright and Paul É. Dumont, “A Parallel between Indic and Babylonian

Sacrifical Ritual,” JAOS 54 (1934): 107-28; Paul É. Dumont, L’Aśvamedha (Paris:

Geuthner, 1927), is the classic treatment of

the subject. On the Indian “navel of the earth,” see Ananda K. Coomaraswamy,

“The Pilgrim’s Way,” Journal of the Bihar

and Orissa Research Society 33 (December 1937): 457, and E. Washburn Hopkins,

“The Divinity of Kings,” JAOS 51 (1931): 309, 311.

^29. Al-Bīrūnī, Chronologie orientalischer Völker, ed. Edward C. Sachau (Delhi:

Chard, 1923), 221-24, 226-27, 230;

Herodotus, History IX, 110; Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 145a; Clemen,

Religions-geschichte Europas, 1:181-83; Albert J. Carnoy, Iranian Mythology, vol. 6

in Gray, Mythology of All Races, 269-71, 293, 297, 299-300, 304-5, 307-8, 313-19,

and Albert J. Carnoy, “Iranian Views of

Origins in Connection with Similar

Babylonian Beliefs,” JAOS 36 (1916): 300-320.

^30. Thus among the Quechua of Peru, Paul Radin, Social Anthropology (New York:

McGraw-Hill, 1932), 85-90, and the

Baganda, 82-84.

^31. To works cited above, add Cyril J. Gadd, Ideas of Divine Rule in the Ancient East,

Schweich Lectures, 1945 (London: Oxford

University Press, 1948); and Henri

Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods: A Study

of Ancient Near Eastern Religions as the

Integration of Society and Nature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948).

^32. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar (Oxford: Clarendon, 1927), 74; Alexandre

Moret, Histoire de l’Orient, 2 vols. (Paris: Presses universitaires, 1929), 1:213.

^33. Eduard Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, 4

vols. (Jena: Diederich, 1928), 2:72; cf. Kees, Ägypten, 172-85.

^34. Gadd, Ideas of Divine Rule, 34.

^35. Moret, Histoire de l’Orient, 1:355, 357.

Albrecht Goetze, Hethiter, Churriter und

Assyrer (Oslo: Aschehoug, 1936), 15-16, 39-40.

^36. Daniel D. Luckenbill, Ancient Records of Assyria and Babylonia, 2 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1926),

1:passim.

^37. Ibid., 170, 185.

^38. Clément Huart and Louis Delaporte, L’Iran antique: Élam et Perse et la civilisation

iranienne (Paris: Michel, 1943), 115-19.

^39. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, 4:21-22; Huart and Delaporte, L’Iran antique, 289, 380.

^40. Sven Hedin, My Life as an Explorer, tr.

Alfhild Huebsch (Garden City: Boni and

Liveright, 1925), 85. In A.D. 562, Chosroes

called himself “divine, beneficent,” “King of

Kings,” “giant of giants,” “whose nature is

from the gods,” and so forth. Menander, De Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes, in PG

113:860.

^41. Optatianus Porfyrius, Carmina II; cf.

Rutilius Namatianus Claudius, De Reditu

Suo I, 47-48 and 61-66; Aelius Aristides, Encomium Romae (To Rome) 30, 72, and

77; Propertius, Elegies III, 1; IV, 2 and 6; Claudius Claudianus, Bellum Geticum (The

Gothic War) 623-47; Horace, Odes III, 5;

IV, 2.

^42. Horace, Carmen Saeculare; Vergil, Aeneid VI, 793-800; Vergil, Eclogues IV, 48-49. On the hierocentric idea, “Janus est mundus et

mundus quattuor partibus constat” (Janus is

the world and the world consists of four

quarters), Augustine, De Civitate Dei (The City of God) VII, 8.

^43. Dio Chrysostom, Discourses I, 37; II, 75; IV, 4; XIV, 23; XXXVI, 22-23, 36; LVI, 4-5.

^44. Charles Diehl and Georges Marçais, Le monde oriental de 395 à 1081 (Paris:

Presses universitaires, 1936), 55-56, 487-95.

^45. Constantine Porphyrogenitus, De Administrando Imperio, intro., in PG

113:160, with much more to the same

effect.

^46. Gunter, cited in Du Cange, “Des cours et des festes solenelles des roys de France,” in

Glossarium Mediae et Infimae Latinitatis,

7:20, unconsciously quoting Esarhaddon:

“Where shall a fox go to escape the sun?”

Luckenbill, Ancient Records, 2:210, n. 523.

^47. Du Cange, “De la prééminence des rois de France au-dessus des autres rois de la terre,”

in Glossarium Mediae et Infimae

Latinitatis, 7:112-15.

^48. Jordanes, Historia Getica Getarum (Gothic History) 35.

^49. Priscus Rhetor, De Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes 3, in PG 113:708, 716.

^50. Menander, De Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes 14, in PG 113:904 (A.D. 575).

^51. Herodotus, History IV, 126.

^52. René Grousset et al., L’Asie orientale des origines au XVe siècle (Paris: Presses universitaires, 1941), 351-52, 355-56, 361-62, 364, 367, 369, 406-7.

^53. Michael Prawdin, The Mongol Empire: Its Rise and Legacy, tr. Eden and Cedar Paul (London: Allen and Unwin, 1940), 283.

^54. Boris Vladimirstov, The Life of Chingis-Khan, tr. D. S. Mirsky (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1930), 65-66; Prawdin, Mongol

Empire, 367.

^55. Prawdin, Mongol Empire, 173.

^56. Ibid., 282. On the seal, Giovanni P. Carpini, History, 26, in Manuel Komroff, ed.,

Contemporaries of Marco Polo (New York: Liveright, 1928), 44.

^57. René Grousset, Histoire des Croisades (Paris: Plon, 1936), 3:569-70.

^58. Ernst F. K. Rosenmueller, Institutiones Iuris Mohammedani circa Bellum contra Eos

Qui ab Islamo Sunt Alieni (Leipzig: Barth, 1825), nos. 1, 3, 4, 5.

^59. Adam Mez, Die Renaissance des Islams (Heidelberg: Winter, 1922), 132-33, 136,

332.

^60. Prawdin, Mongol Empire, 389. “According to Chinese political philosophy there could

be in the world only one rightful ‘Emperor,’

however many kings there might be.” Thus

William M. McGovern, The Early Empires

of Central Asia (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1939), 321.

^61. Prawdin, Mongol Empire, 414.

^62. Ibid., 512-18.

^63. August Müller, Der Islam in Morgen- und Abendland, 2 vols. (Berlin: Grote, 1885-87), 2:268, gives a psychological explanation for

this phenomenon.

^64. William of Rubruck, Journal 54, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco

Polo, 188.

^65. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, 2:72, 311.

^66. Grousset, L’Asie orientale, 42: “La notion du monarque universel ou tchakravartin . . .

provient des vastes dominations de l’Asie

Anterieure” (the idea of a universal ruler or

tchakravartin originates in the vast realms of Western Asia).

^67. McGovern, Early Empires of Central Asia, 224, 245, 255, 268, 288, 294.

^68. Mez, Renaissance des Islams, 136; cf. 130-43.

^69. Works cited above (nn. 4 to 29 inclusive) nearly all mention this combination, but

special treatment of the theme may be found

in Gaster, Thespis: Ritual, Myth, and

Drama, 138, 169-71, 185-86, 388; and Hall,

Review of de Buck, Egyptische voorstellingen betreffende den oerheuvel,

185-87.

^70. Elliot Smith and others have shown that the special business of all dragons is to prevent

people from reaching water. Can this

otherwise unaccountable peculiarity be

explained by the retreat of amphibious

monsters—snakes and saurians—to the

shrinking water holes of a drought-ridden

world, there to become a frightening

obstacle to those who came there for the

“water of life”? T. Elliot Smith, The

Evolution of the Dragon (Manchester:

Manchester University Press, 1919).

^71. For the literal reality of the situation among the Mongols of today, see Henning Haslund-Christensen, Men and Gods in Mongolia

(New York: Dutton, 1935), 246, 281; the

election of Chingis Khan was at such a

place, Friedrich E. Krause, Cingis Han: Die Geschichte seines Lebens nach den

chinesischen Reichsannalen (Heidelberg: Winter, 1922), 11, 14, 18-19, 25, 28, 30, as

was that of the Mongol emperors of China, according to The Travels of Marco Polo the Venetian, ed. John Masefield (London: Dutton, 1908), 166-71 (II, 6), the Naimans,

Krause, Cingis Han, 28, and Turks, Edwin S. Creasy, History of the Ottoman Turks, 2

vols. (London: Bentley, 1854-56), 1:9-11;

Menander, De Legationibus Romanorum ad

Gentes, in PG 113:904, 885; the Golden Horde, Carpini, History 25, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco Polo, 42-43; the Armenians, Moses of Chorene, Armenische

Chrestomathie, ed. Max Lauer, 2 vols.

(Wien: Braumüller, 1881), 2:40-41, 101- 2;

Persians, Friedrich von Spiegel, Erânische Alterthumskunde, 3 vols. (Leipzig:

Engelmann, 1871-78), 2:53-54; Xenophon,

Anabasis I, 2, 7, as well as the ancient Indians, Hanns Bächtold-Stäubli,

Handwörterbuch des deutschen

Aberglaubens, 10 vols. (Leipzig: de Gruyter, 1927-42), 6:1418-21; Hedin, My Life as an

Explorer, 460-61, 467-68, 122, all held their great assemblies in such a setting. The

Assyrian kings built their parks “like unto Mount Amanus,” with special channels “for

the watering of horses” (cf. fig. 9, p. 103),

Luckenbill, Ancient Records, 2:162, 170, 185, 188, 269. The Goths met in such a

place, Jordanes, Gothic History 51, as did the Scythians before them, Herodotus,

History IV, 52; and the Arabs believe that Mecca was transported from Adam’s Mount

in Ceylon, which is such a place, Masefield,

ed., The Travels of Marco Polo, 372 (III, 23). Even the oasis of Ammon followed the

plan, according to Arthur B. Cook, Zeus, 3

vols. (Cambridge: University Press, 1925),

1:369, as certainly did the shrine of Dodona

—the oldest in Greece—which was

transported from Ammon’s oasis. The whole

picture is given in certain Babylonian hymns;

see Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien,

2:165, 167. The same in the ancient North,

Gylfaginning 4.

^72. Pindar, Olympian Odes II, 1-4, cf. I, 1-17; Tertullian, Ad Nationes II, 10; Augustine, The City of God VI, 7, 2; Plutarch,

Quaestiones Romanae no. 35; Plutarch, Romulus 4-5.

^73. Henri Frankfort, Cylinder Seals (London: Macmillan, 1939), pl. XVIIc; p. 90;

Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, 2:165.

^74. Qur’an 22:28, 34, 36.

^75. Hommel, Ethnologie und Geographie des alten Orients, 118.

^76. Du Cange, “Des assemblées solenelles des rois de France,” and “Des cours et des

festes solenelles des roys de France,” in

Glossarium Mediae et Infimae Latinitatis,

7:15-23.

^77. Hyginus, Fabulae 140.

^78. William of Rubruck, Journal, 19, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco

Polo, 95.

^79. Prawdin, Mongol Empire, 205; cf. 239.

^80. Vladimirstov, Life of Chingis-Khan, 38.

^81. Al-Fakhrī, Al-Adab as-Sultaniyya wa’d-Dawla al-Islamiyya (Cairo: n.p., n.d.), 117, 119.

^82. Luckenbill, Ancient Records, 1:295-96, 59,

156, 154.

^83. Ibid., 2:170-71, 190, 268, 314, and so forth.

^84. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, 4:49, 55; Herodotus, History I, 95; Xenophon,

Anabasis IV, 4, 4.

^85. Xenophon, Anabasis V, 3.

^86. Spiegel, Erânische Altertumskunde, 2:106.

^87. Xenophon, Cyropaedia III, 1, 8; Priscus Rhetor, De Legationibus Romanorum ad

Gentes 3, in PG 113:720-21; Jordanes, Gothic History 10; cf. Herodotus, History I, 205-14; the best description is in Ibn Baṭūṭa, Riḥla, 2 vols. (Cairo: 1938), 1:214.

^88. Xenophon, Anabasis V, 6, 17.

^89. Thus Adam, Cain, and Noah, Book of Jubliees 4:9, following the divine pattern, Sibylline Oracles 3:772-76. Gadd, Ideas of Divine Rule, 6, comments on the strange persistence of building motifs in the earliest creation legends.

^90. Haslund-Christensen, Men and Gods in Mongolia, 151-52, 156. Cf. the case of the Hun Jïjï in A.D. 43, McGovern, Early

Empires of Central Asia, 191.

^91. Mildred Cable, The Gobi Desert (New York: Macmillan, 1944), 133. Cf. Haslund-Christensen, Men and Gods in Mongolia,

125, 128. Huart and Delaporte, L’Iran

antique, 307; Priscus Rhetor, De

Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes 3, in PG 113:725 (Attila’s palace).

^92. George Vernadsky, Ancient Russia, vol. 1 in George Vernadsky and Michael Karpovich,

A History of Russia (New Haven: Yale

University Press, 1943), 237-40, 248; cf.

292.

^93. Moret, Histoire de l’Orient, 1:278.

^94. See Hugh Nibley, “The Arrow, the Hunter, and the State,” Western Political Quarterly 2 (1949): 338-40; reprinted in this volume,

pages 12-16.

^95. Prawdin, Mongol Empire, 185; Vladimirstov, Life of Chingis-Khan, 51-52.

^96. Xenophon, Cyropaedia II, 4, 19-22.

^97. Giovanni P. Carpini, History, 6, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco Polo, 12.

^98. Ammianus Marcellinus XXXI, 2.

^99. Luckenbill, Ancient Records, 1:82, 86-87, 121-22, 189, 271; 2:392.

^100. Max Seligsohn, “Nimrod,” in Isidore Singer, ed., Jewish Encylopedia, 12 vols. (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1905), 9:309-11;

Clementine Homily IX, 4, in PG 2:244; Jeremias, Das Alte Testament, 158-59; Book of Jasher 7:39-46; 9:20-22.

^101. Homer, Hymn to Pythian Apollo 370-74; Euripides, Iphigeneia at Taurus 1234-82.

^102. Snorri Sturluson, Edda Formali, chs. 10-11.

^103. Moret, Histoire de l’Orient, 1:298.

^104. Haslund-Christensen, Men and Gods in Mongolia, 310, 132-49. There were

Christian tent churches to match these

temple tents, Grousset, Histoire des

Croisades, 3:564, 722; cf. E. A. Wallis Budge, ed., The Chronography of Gregory

Abû’l Faraj, the Son of Aaron, the Hebrew

Physician, Commonly Known as Bar

Hebraeus, 2 vols. (Oxford: Oxford

University Press, 1932), 1:505-6.

^105. Daniel 7:9; 1 Enoch 14:18; Menander, De Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes, in PG

113:885; Odoric, Journal, 12, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco Polo, 239-40.

^106. Life of Adam and Eve 22:3; 2 Enoch 8:3.

^107. William of Rubruck, Journal, 21, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco

Polo, 98.

^108. Jordanes, Gothic History 40, the shield-wall duplicated in the funeral-ring, ibid., 49; Ammianus Marcellinus XXXI, 2; 7-8; and

12; Xenophon, Anabasis I, 8, 12; Huart and Delaporte, L’Iran antique, 380; William of Rubruck, Journal, 29, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco Polo, 124.

^109. Herodotus, History IV, 158.

^110. Attila moved constantly from palace to palace, accompanied by his mighty host, “in

the manner of the Scythians,” says Priscus

Rhetor, De Legationibus Romanorum ad

Gentes 3, in PG 113:720. Cf. for the same

picture, William of Rubruck, Journal, 12, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco

Polo, 76; and Ammianus Marcellinus XXXI, 2.

^111. Odoric, Journey, 11, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco Polo, 237; see n.

112.

^112. Attila sat on heaped-up rugs and cushions, Priscus Rhetor, De Legationibus

Romanorum ad Gentes, in PG 113:732, and his dining hall was hung with curtains and

rugs “like a Greek or Roman bridal bed,”

ibid., in PG 113:737. Batu’s throne was “like a bed,” William of Rubruck, Journal, 21, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco

Polo, 99, and Scacatar “sat upon his bed holding a guitar in his hand, and his wife sat by him, ibid., 12, in Komroff, ed.,

Contemporaries of Marco Polo, 77. Ibn Baṭūṭa, Riḥla, 1:26-27, actually calls the Khan’s throne a firash (bed).

^113. The throne must be covered by a tent, Menander, De Legationibus Romanorum ad

Gentes, in PG 113:885, and, indeed, “the

canopied throne” is part of the original equipment of the primitive nomad tent-temple, according to Haslund-Christensen,

Men and Gods in Mongolia, 283.

^114. Gadd, Ideas of Divine Rule, 36.

^115. Prawdin, Mongol Empire, 477-78; Tamerlane built his palaces like pavilions,

“using them for the same purpose as his

ancestors used tents.” The palace at Peking

was “supported” by two hundred silken tent-

cords, Masefield, ed., The Travels of Marco Polo 146 (I, 57); cf. 166-71 (II, 6); cf.

Odoric, Journey, 11, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco Polo, 237.

^116. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, 4:111; Diehl and Marçais, Le monde oriental, 339; Huart and Delaporte, L’Iran antique, 373.

The same artisans who built St. Sophia also

built the Mosque of Damascus, Ibn Baṭūṭa,

Riḥla, 1:52-53. It has often been observed that domed tents are found originally only in

Central Asia, where the royal white yurt,

covered with brilliant color and design,

reached enormous proportions. It is hard not

to see in the “golden dome” of the Grand Khan, Ibn Baṭūṭa, Riḥla, 1:213, the

prototype of these golden domes that

everywhere rose above the heads of kings

and the altars of cathedrals. The Travels of Marco Polo, ed. Masefield, 169 (II, 6), speaks of what can only be colored glass

windows at the court of the Khan.

^117. Moritz Hoernes, Natur- und Urgeschichte des Menschen, 2 vols. (Vienna: Hastlben 1909), 1:380. Mohammedan law defines

legitimate spoils as “clothes, arms, and

wagons.” Rosenmueller, Institutiones Iuris Mohammedani, no. 28.

^118. Hedin, My Life as an Explorer, 107, notes that the court ceremonial of Samarkand is

exactly the same as described by Clavijo;

and Haslund-Christensen, Men and Gods in

Mongolia, 297-98, observed in the royal camp of the Torguts exactly the same tent

arrangement as the one which Xenophon

tells us was used 2,400 years before in the

camp of Cyrus.

^119. Rosenmueller, Institutiones Iuris

Mohammedani, no. 53, pp. 11-13. Only the horse makes noble; camels, mules, etc., do

not count—which betrays the Central Asiatic

origin of the code, ibid., nos. 31-32.

^120. Goetze, Hethiter, Churriter und Assyrer, 39-41, 110-12.

^121. Quotation from Odoric, Journal, 12 and 14, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco

Polo, 238, 242; cf. Priscus Rhetor, De Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes 3, in PG 113:713, 737-38; Carpini, History, 20, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco

Polo, 35; Menander, De Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes 8, in PG 113:885; William of Rubruck, Journal, 4, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco Polo, 63; Masefield, ed., The Travels of Marco Polo, 182-86 (II, 10); Ibn Baṭūṭa, Riḥla, 1:213, 218.

^122. Edvard Lehmann, “Die Perser,” in Bertholet and Lehmann, Lehrbuch der

Religionsgeschichte, 2:257. The Byzantine court went so far as to imitate flying angels: Note of Anselmus Bandurius, cited in

Constantine Porphyrogenitus, De Administrando Imperio 36, in PG 113:305-7.

^123. The colors stand for the four quarters, Carpini, History, 24, in Komroff, ed., Contemporaries of Marco Polo, 40; William of Rubruck, Journal, 53, in ibid., 187; The Story of Ahikar, 6:10-13, in R. H. Charles et al., eds., The Apocrypha and

Pseudipigrapha of the Old Testament, 2

vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1913), 2:758-59.

On western livery, Du Cange, “Des cours et

des festes solenelles des roys de France,” in

Glossarium Mediae et Infimae Latinitatis,

7:19-23.

^124. Du Cange, “Des cours et des festes solenelles des roys de France,” in

Glossarium Mediae et Infimae Latinitatis,

7:19-23.

^125. Jordanes, Gothic History 56.

^126. Budge, The Chronography of Bar Hebraeus, 1:496.

^127. Varro, De Lingua Latina V, 33.

^128. Claudius Claudianus, The Gothic War 355.

^129. Rosenmueller, Institutiones Iuris Mohammedani, nos. 13, 16, 22, 27, 39, 47-48, 55.

^130. Jordanes, Gothic History 52.

^131. Robert Eisler, Iēsous Basileus ou Basileusas, 2 vols. (Heidelberg: Winter, 1930), 2:625; August von Gall, Basileia tou Theou (Heidelberg: Winter, 1926), 241-42.

^132. See Wilhelm Nestle, Der Friedensgedanke in der antiken Welt (Leipzig: Dieterich, 1938), and Harald Fuchs, Augustin und der

antike Friedensgedanke (Berlin: Weidmann, 1926), 39-40, 115-17.

^133. Budge, The Chronography of Bar Hebraeus, 1:490.

^134. This is exhaustively demonstrated by Semen Lipkin, Manas Velikodushnyu

(Moscow: Sovietski Pisatyel, 1947), a study

of the Kirghiz, in which the enemy chieftains

are invariably inarticulate monsters, while

the friendly ones are holy knights.

^135. Rosenmueller, Institutiones Iuris

Mohammedani, no. 17.

^136. Ammianus Marcellinus XXXI, 3, 8.

^137. George of Pisidia, De Expeditione Persica II, 240-55, in PG 92:1226-27; Menander, De Legationibus Gentium ad Romanos, in PG 113:824-25; though the other side do everything we do, with us it is virtue; with

them a base perversion. See Theodore the

Alan, Alanicus 6, in PG 140:393.

^138. Illustrated by the arguments and discussions in Priscus Rhetor, De Legationibus

Romanorum ad Gentes 3, in PG 113:708, 725, 728-29, 732. While the West posed as

champion of liberty, everyone was fleeing to

Persia: “Malunt enim sub specie captivitatis

vivere liberi, quam sub specie libertatis esse captivi” (they prefer to live as free men in

the guise of bondage, rather than to be

slaves in the guise of freedom), Salvianus,

De Gubernatione Dei V, 5.

^139. Jordanes, Gothic History 58.

^140. Ammianus Marcellinus, XXXI, 2, 12.

^141. Jordanes, Gothic History 34.

^142. Ibid., 53.

^143. Ibid., 58.

^144. Agathias, History V, 23, in PG 88:1589-96; Menander, De Legationibus Romanorum ad

Gentes, in PG 113:852; Justinian showed this partiality even before he became

emperor, according to Procopius, Anécdota

XI, 5.

^145. Procopius, Anécdota XI, 12.

^146. Ibid., XXI, 26, 28-29; XXV, 25.

^147. Ibid., VII, 8-9; 11-14.

^148. Ibid., VII, 11-14.

^149. Ibid., VI, 21.

^150. Ibid., XI, 1.

^151. Ibid., VIII, 5.

^152. Ibid., VIII, 9.

^153. Ibid., VIII, 4-5.

^154. Ibid., XXX, 24.

^155. Ibid., XI, 3; XXVI, 23.

^156. Ibid., XXX, 26.

^157. Ibid., XXX, 23.

^158. Ibid., XII, 25.

^159. Ibid., XIV, 2.

^160. Ibid., XIX, 14-15.

^161. Ibid., XIX, 16.

^162. Ibid., XXX, 30.

^163. Fulcher, Historia Hierosolymitana I, 1-7, especially Urban’s speech, chs. 2-3, in PL

155:825-41.

^164. Guglielmo Ferrero, Characters and Events in Roman History (New York: Putnam,

1909), 233.

^165. “Christianity had adopted the astrological Weltbild given by the East to the West,”

Frederick J. E. Raby, A History of

Christian-Latin Poetry (Oxford: Oxford University Press 1927), 70. One might trace

the unbroken descent of the hierocentric

universe from the Pythagoreans to Dante.

Clementine Homily 14, in PG 2:349, is a good description.

^166. Éttienne Gilson, La philosophie au Moyen Age (Paris: Payot, 1944), 253-58.

^167. Diehl and Marçais, Le monde oriental, 487-95; Eusebius, Life of Constantine, passim,

in PG 20; Louis Duchesne, Early History of the Christian Church, 3 vols. (London: Murray, 1931), 2:518-26.

^168. Louis Duchesne, Origines du culte chrétien (Paris: De Boccard, 1925), 47-88.

^169. E.g., Saint Ignatius, Liturgy, in PG 5:972.

Of course, one spoke much of the

monarch’s all-pervading justice and

compassion, Theodore Silverstein, “The

Throne of the Emperor Henry in Dante’s

Paradise and the Mediaeval Conception of

Christian Kingship,” Harvard Theological

Review 32 (1939): 115-29, but what pagan autocrat’s supporters did not do the same?

^170. Grousset, Histoire des Croisades, 3:565.

^171. Franz Oppenheimer, The State, tr. J. M.

Gitterman (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill,

1914), ch. 2; Goetze, Hethiter, Churriter

und Assyrer, 33-42, 85-87, 96-97, 117-20, 126-32.

^172. Arnold J. Toynbee, “The Unification of the World and the Change in Historical

Perspective,” History 33 (1948): 25-26.

^173. Petrus Patricius, De Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes 12, in PG 113:668-69.

Sparsiones

The Roman practice, best described as

sparsio, of bestowing public donatives by throwing things among the multitude to be

scrambled for in scenes of wild disorder has

never received the attention which its

strangeness solicits and its significance for

the study of Roman politics and economics

deserves. 1 Though a preliminary view of a neglected and highly speculative field cannot

but raise more questions than it answers, the

nature and importance of the sparsiones may, we believe, be adequately demonstrated by

consideration of three points: (1) what was

distributed by sparsio, (2) by whom and on what occasions, and (3) by what particular

methods.

What was distributed by sparsio? The articles scattered to the Roman multitude

have long been the object of careful study.

They fall into two classes, tokens and gifts

“in kind.” The tokens— tesserae, coins, little balls, sections of reed, and such bizarre

objects as figurines and inscribed spoons—

are such by virtue of their designated

exchange value. 2 As gifts “in kind” may be classed figs, dates, nuts, sweets, and

cookies, as well as such less appetizing bits

as vegetables, fruits, grain, chick-peas,

beans, birds, and flowers. 3 The solid sparsio was often accompanied by a liquid one of water, wine, perfume, or oil. 4 Meal, blood, and ashes were also strewn abroad in

rites in which the public scrambling played a

conspicuous part. 5

The tokens in question were of course

“symbols” (the word originates with them, in

fact), 6 but no more so than the other gifts.

Figs, nuts, fruits, meal, flowers, and so forth are well-known symbols of fertility,

possessing in the sparsio the broader

signification of a “general blessing. ”7 The ancients tell us that a shower of chick-peas

and beans stands for omnia semina (all kinds of seeds),8 and that Janus’s scattering of sweets is but an earnest of sweet things to follow through the year. 9 The same motif of abundance is evident in the tokens and

figurines,10 which were interchangeable with gifts in kind and could represent omne genus rerum (every sort of thing)11—it was not just bread that the emperor scattered; it was

“perpetual daily bread. ”12 The keynote is abundance—abundance of everything good,

the plouthygeia of the Greek sparsio 13 as it appears in the gifts of the Hygeia, Thalysia,

Panspermia, Thargelos, and so forth, when

mixtures of grain and fruits were scattered over the heads of the recipients to impart all the blessings of life,14 and life itself. 15 With such a mixture the Romans showered their

archaic Vortumnus, god of the annus vertens at his festival, 16 and were themselves showered at the year-feast of the Floralia, 17

when “omnia semina super populum

spargebant” (they strewed every kind of seed

on the people), as well as nuts, flowers, and

beans, in primitive chthonian-agricultural

rites. 18 But the true Roman equivalent of plouthygeia is the strena, the king’s gift at the New Year, which in its primitive form of

laurel branch seems to have figured in

sparsiones, 19 as it certainly does in its other forms. 20 Whether the original sparsio was a scattering over the people and fields of

Zeugungskraft (reproductive power) in the form of blood, ashes, or fresh remains of the

dismembered year-god, 21 or whether it was a strewing of bloodless offerings such as

honey-cakes or mola salsa, 22 it would be useless to inquire, since both forms are

found together from the earliest time. 23

Who gave the sparsiones, and on what

occasions? So far we are on familiar ground.

No one will deny that some sparsiones

followed a New Year’s pattern. But were

there any that did not? The answer is in the

negative. In maintaining that the great public distributions were simply the extension of

unpretentious private festivities, 24 scholars have ignored the essential aspect of the

latter, especially where sparsiones are concerned; namely, that they were not private

at all. Private sparsiones were for

celebrations marking some rite de passage

in a family—a birth, death, marriage,

coming-of-age, or the like.25 These are

precisely the occasions on which the individual’s case, overpassing the bounds of

everyday life to establish contact with the

spirit world, becomes a concern of great

moment to the entire society. 26 The Roman funeral was a public affair;27 the Roman people could in fact commandeer the funeral

of anyone at will, 28 and compel the dead, through his heir, to make that public

distribution which belonged to a funeral. 29 If the defunct could not afford this donative, a

public collection would be taken, a

“shower” which the heir would presently

redistribute as the dead man’s gift to the

people.30 At marriages it was the same story, and bride and groom could no more evade

the obligation of scattering presents to the

populace than they could avoid the meal that

the populace threw at them. 31 Likewise, the triumphator both received and gave a

shower; 32 indeed, Lord Raglan has recently called attention to the obvious fact that

triumph, wedding, and funeral are in all

essentials ritually identical. 33 Alike they mark the beginning and end of a lifeperiod;

for the individual they are little New Year’s

days, celebrated with the same feasting,

games, greetings, and sparsiones as mark the regular New Year, 34 a time when public and private rites seem to be wholly mingled and

confounded. 35 The giver of a sparsio, furthermore, ceased by that act to be a mere

private individual, for he received a statue in his memory, 36 and was annually glorified in a public feast of his own providing.37

The striking resemblance of various

important Roman festivals to each other has

been explained by referring them to a single

common prototype.38 This was the Secular celebration, the inauguration of the Great

Year, marking the life-cycle of the Roman people, individually and collectively.39 And this Secular rite was before everything the

great sparsio, deriving its name from the primitive * ē-tlo-m, “was das Säen

ermöglicht” (that which sowing makes

possible)—the sowing, specifically, of men

and animals, the begetting of the race.40 The central act of the celebration was the

redistribution to all the people by the king

(the emperor in the revived version) of

praemitiae—beans, barley, corn—which

they had brought in as year-offerings.41 Much the same thing took place at Delphi

originally “on the birthday of the god” :42 all over the ancient world, in fact, a royal

sparsio dramatized the begetting of the race on the day of creation, the New Year.43 It is quite proper that the chief patron of the

sparsiones should have been Janus, first king and father of the race, and that the hero-kings

of the first age—Janus, Saturn, Semo-Sancus, Cereus, Lupercus, Faunus, and so

forth—should uniformly figure in the role of

the sower. 44 If private sparsiones had to be given by one who was mactus (honored,

glorified) by virtue of standing for the

moment between one world and another (for

such is the rite de passage), the king was always mactus: he was the type and model of the one who give the sparsio. 45

During the Republic, for example, a

magistrate giving grain on a lavish scale

could be charged with trying to play king to the people, 46 which clearly betrays the origin of the system. The public donative as a royal

but at the same time very popular survival

was a source both of power and

embarrassment to the oligarchs. Cicero has

only praise for a system which enables great

men to win all but regal acclaim,47 yet he is quite aware how ill the usage suits a

republican order and insists that public liberality is a royal, not a private, virtue.48 It is impossible indeed to conceive of a system

less compatible to the good order of the

Republic, or more plainly and fatally

designed to beget corruption in it, than that of the Roman collections and distributions, 49 or any more blatant offense to every idea of

order and decorum (so dear to the Republic)

than a public scramble. 50 The distribution, particularly the sparsiones, it is safe to say, could hardly have arisen and taken root

under the very noses of the conscript fathers

without their knowledge and consent: if they

were not suppressed along with newfangled

cults and luxuries, it is because they were

classified among the sacrosanct and

ineradicable survivals of an earlier day.51

Their immense vitality and popularity

carried them right through the Republic, in

fact, to become the very cornerstone of

imperial authority.

From the first the emperor was careful

to reserve to himself the sole right of making donatives (cf. fig. 13). 52 Not only was this his exclusive and inescapable office,53 it was also his one sufficient claim to rule if

all else failed.54 A reading of Dio, Suetonius, or Tacitus will suffice to show

that a ruler at Rome was popular in that

degree to which he resembled a Saturnalian

king, and that from the first every emperor

made a determined effort to play that strange

and hilarious role. 55 It was the people who insisted on this: even though he forbade it,

they persisted in giving the emperor that

popular title of Dominus, 56 the specific fixture of public feasts,57 which proclaimed to the scandalized world that he was

dominus et deus, nothing less than the old festive king, dominus convivii, giver of all

good things, 58 the equivalent of the Greek basileus, 59 the despotes who in the Old Comedy bursts on the scene with a shower of

gifts and a clamorous invitation to all the

world to come and feast at his house.60

It was with this festive office of year-

king, with its boundless popular appeal, 61

that the political rivals of the late Republic played so dangerously. It was as praefectus annonae that Pompey earned his title of The Great and the right to wear royal insignia at

festivals.62 When a Crassus, Sulla, or Lucullus gave a feast of abundance, it was at

the very Ara Maxima where Hercules, as type and model of the victorious year-king,

had set the example. 63 Brutus and Octavian bid desperately against each other for the

right to play year-king, 64 and Antony with equal presumption could take the role of

King Lupercus at Rome or Dionysus at

Athens.65 Caesar’s Clodius posed as the New Numa,66 and Caesar’s own regalia was that of the festive king. 67 It was, moreover, as lord of peace and plenty that both he and

his successor enjoyed the grant of sovereign

power68 by a popular consent which recalls the manner in which Cyrus became king of

the Persians in return for a timely feast.69

Indeed, it was an established procedure in

ancient times for an ambitious man to seize a

throne simply by getting himself made King

of the Festival and then, by exercising his

ceremonial right to demand year-gifts and to

redistribute them, reorganize the state while

refusing to yield up his royal office.70 It was for that matter at the Ludi Saeculares that Augustus himself assumed rule of the

world. 71 An unbroken tradition binds the imperial bounty to the Saturnia regna of the fabled priest-kings: to the end the emperor

remains the magnus parens mundi, the lord of peace and plenty, the New Hercules, King

of the Golden Age,72 “sowing his gifts broadcast as a sower his seeds.” 73

Figure 13. On one of the finest congiaria to survive (A), Trajan is

shown enthroned with his deputy

seated before him giving handouts.

Behind the deputy stands the figure

of the Liberalitas holing a tessera.

The man climbing the ladder

represents the people receiving the

Imperial donatives for the third

time, as declared by the inscription.

We see the curtains of the stagelike

aedicula drawn back, revealing the

haloed figure of the Augustus,

Constantius II (B), in typical

Byzantine splendor, c. A.D. 350. He

is seated on a odd-looking throne

and is showering gold coins with

his right hand to the people below.

What was the method employed in the

sparsiones, and why? On tokens used in the distributions are found representations of the emperor handing out gifts, or of Liberalitas shaking out the contents of her cornucopia,

from a raised platform.74 Heliogabalus is described as acting Phoenicio ritu when, dressed as the Sun, he mounts a specially

built platform to shower gold and silver cups

on the people. 75 Certainly the picture of Gaius flinging gold and silver from the

palace roof76 suggests the famous scene from the tomb of Ay (cf. fig. 14), in which

Amenophis IV throws gold from a palace

balcony while above his head, to make the

meaning clear, the Sun with outstretched

hands showers his gifts at the same time.77

But, while it has notable archaic affinities, 78

the custom of casting gifts from a high

platform is no late Oriental importation at

Rome, for the old Republican usage was to

scatter nummos (coins) from the rostra, 79

apparently the survival of a very primitive native sparsio. 80

Likewise the chariot from which the

emperor would fling his gold at the New

Year,81 while it has striking Oriental parallels in the heavenly car or plow from

which the year-god showered blessings over

men and fields,82 has just as definite counterparts in the North and West among the

Scythians,83 Celts, 84 Greeks, 85 and Germans, 86 all of whom remember in their oldest ritual and legend the gold that fell

from the wagon or plow of the god at the turn

of the year. The holy vehicle also appears in

Rome as the chariot of the sparsio-giving triumphator (cf. fig. 11B, p. 117),87 the quadriga in the Vulcanal,88 or that heavenly car mounted upon the topmost part of the

Capitol, upon which the fertility of the

Roman fields was believed to depend.89

Besides the platform and chariot, one must consider the linea, stretched high overhead, from which, in some endlessly

puzzling fashion, sweets and tokens were

shaken down over the crowd in what the

ancients refer to as imber, pluviae, grando, nubilia, and so forth. 90 This is more than a poet’s fancy. The sparsio that fell from on high was actually thought of as falling from

heaven. Throughout the ancient world one

meets in legend and ritual the golden shower

that descends upon the world to fructify it on the day of creation. 91 The Roman version of this is King Janus’s sweet rain of honey and

gold; it is the sparsio, from the golden chariot92 or gilded platform, 93 of gilt tokens and golden grain, of crocus, saffron,

powdered chrysolite or bean-straw, gilt figs,

dates, and cookies—the golden color

predominates in the sparsiones:94 as in the year-rites of India, everything that is

scattered is thought of as golden because or est semence (gold is seed). 95 What is more natural than that such a shower should usher

in the aureum tempus (Golden Age) at the Saturnalia?96

Figure 14. As stepfather of the

renowned beauty Nefertiti, Ay enjoyed Pharaoh Akhenaton's

confidence as shown by his titles—

Bearer of the Fan, Master of the

Horse, Father of the God (Father-

in-law of the King) as recorded in

his tob at Tel el-Amarna, C. 1350

B.C. He and his wife Tyi are shown

reverently cathing the wide variety

of gifts being thrown to them by the

entire royal family amidst

exuberant dancing and rejoicing by

the assembled court. Among the

usual golden necklaces we see

vases, signet rings, and the

earliest-known depiction of gloves,

painted red. To commemorate such

an unusual gift, he had himself

shown outside the palace showing

them off to his admiring friends

(inset).

The golden shower belongs to the familiar hieros gamos: it is the fructifying of the earth by the shower, thought of both as

seed and as water, that falls from heaven. 97

This treasure is stored in the inner chamber

of the Earth-Goddess98—represented at Rome both by the temple of Vesta99 and the treasury of Ceres, that immemorial shrine of

the plebs, wherein was kept both the yellow grain and the yellow gold of the state,100 both being scattered abroad at the proper time

under her sponsorship.101 It was Flora, the Terra Mater, who “prima per immensas

sparsit nova semina gentes” (first scattered

new seeds among countless peoples). 102 But, though it reposes by right in the bins of the

goddess, the ultimate source of this wealth is her heavenly spouse.103

This concept is familiar to the whole

ancient world. In the common Egyptian

formula “all things good and pure” are

“given of heaven, formed by the earth,

conveyed by the Nile.” 104 “From heaven shall abundance come down upon thee,” is

the Sumerian version, 105 while Babylonian Marduk filled the land with feasts of plenty

when he “poured out abundance over

Shidlam, ”106 even as the God of Israel”

commanded the clouds from above, and

opened the doors of heaven, and had rained

down manna . . . and had given them of the

corn of heaven: man did eat angels’ food; He

sent them meat to the full; . . . He rained

down flesh upon them as dust,” etc. 107

Though early Easter ceremonies furnish

some of the most striking instances of

sparsio, 108 it was not through Christian channels that the idea of the heavenly

donative reached Rome; for when the boys

of the city gathered beneath the Pope’s

window to sing for a largess at the New

Year, it was “quomodo qui ad Caesarem”

that they called to him to appear at his high

window like the sun, moon, and cloud, to

scatter good things over them. 109 This donative is the equivalent of the English

“singing cakes” or “singing silver,” which,

as in the Sarum usage, “must be caste out of

the steple, that all the boyes in the parish

must lie scrambling by the eares.” 110 It recalls the office of Augustus, who, upon

becoming patron of the iuventus, all over Italy supervised such youthful scrambles for

tokens and sweets. 111 There is an ancient representation of the linea in action which clearly portrays its heavenly nature. It is

from a lost glass vase of the fourth century

and depicts the distribution of the annonae: high above a group of people with birds,

flowers, and festive mappae in their hands fly two winged genii, each holding a string

of bellaria in either hand—they are plainly

heavenly purveyors of heavenly gifts (fig.

15).112

Figure 15. The praefect of the

Annonae, his wife, and two children

are interspersed with the smaller

figures representing the four

seasons—the full circle of the

Annus, or year. Both father and son

make the gesture of speaking (cf.

figure 17).

The Romans not only received year-gifts by sparsio, but made them in the same way; that is, by throwing cakes, coins,

tokens, flowers, etc., into pits or waters

leading to the other world.113 Though this practice is found among ancient peoples

everywhere, 114 none make more of it than the Romans. The original Roman stips was food or a coin that was tossed or thrown to the

god; only later was it laid on the sacra

mensa. 115 Archaic Roman offerings to chthonian deities had to be thrown or tossed

in some way before being burned, 116 quite like the Jewish heave- and wave-offerings, 117 and the burning itself was a kind of sparsio. 118 Though throwing is a well-known way of banishing evil, and the act of

sparsio may have been designed “both to get rid of the evil and to distribute the good

fertility charm over the fields,” 119 the main

thing about throwing objects, good or bad (and who shall see evil in honey-cakes and

lucky coins?) is that thereby the gift or curse is passed through the void, from one world

to another, as it were, with careful avoidance of physical contact between giver and

receiver. 120 The spirits are fed—at a safe distance—by sparsio. 121 If food fell from the hand or the table by accident it could not be

retrieved, for it had passed to the spirits122

—to Hecate, who would redistribute it to the

poor (earthly counterpart of the spirits) by

sparsio. 123

New Year’s gifts are both given and

received through the void. They fall in some

unaccountable way into one’s shoe or

stocking, or they are suddenly thrown in

through the window or chimney; they are not

transmitted directly, but descend

mysteriously in the night, like manna124—it

is even dangerous to recognize the giver. 125

This avoidance of contact is the idea behind

royal sparsiones among certain backward peoples of antiquity, where the king, living

aloof from the world of men, took his meals

behind a partition, removed only at the New

Year, 126 or in a secret room, 127 or at a table set apart as if for a spirit from the other

world. 128 The world was thought of as living on the crumbs from his table, 129 and he gave his portions by throwing them to his subjects, who would scramble after them “like

dogs.” 130

One cannot sufficiently admire the

mentality which, having introduced the

tesserae into Rome as a means, for so we are assured, 131 of procuring good order and regularity in the grain distributions, chose to dispense the same in mad, universal

scrambles. 132 The sparsio does not of itself

call for a scramble—there was more than enough for all, and no one was allowed to be

disappointed. 133 Plainly the undignified rixa, direptio, rapina, tumultus, and so forth were a regular and necessary part of the

business.134

What the scramble represented was a

sort of grab bag, for the sparsio was a kind of lottery. 135 The element of chance plays a most important role in the distributions: the

fundamental principle even of the highly

regulated annona was at all times simply luck, admission to the grain-lists being

determined solely by lot. 136 Everything about the Saturnalia smacks of divination—the

very food of the year-feast is prophetic.137 A gift received by sparsio falls into one’s hands by the imponderable working of fate;

it is a providential thing, a present for which one is beholden to no man; it is a boon from

heaven, given with majestic impartiality in bewildering abundance and unrestrained

disorder. 138 It is a sign and a promise, a communication from on high.

How far the ancients went in this

interpretation of the sparsio can be seen if one considers the objects of the rixae. They were sortes. 139 The word comes from sero,

“set in rows,” i.e., “strung on a line,” and

goes back to the oracular shrines of

prehistoric Italy,140 where at the New Year the Earth Goddess (as Fortuna)141 would tell people their fortunes by means of lots and

dice. 142 The lots— sortes—were hung on a line, a linea, and “devenaient prophetiques par le seul fait qu’elles etaient tirees sort”

(became prophetic for the simple reason that

they were cast). 143 All this fits with the sortes of the sparsio, which also came from an oracular shrine, were perforated for

hanging on a line, were given out at the New Year, 144 and bore the name of Fortuna, 145

whose gifts, moreover, were commonly

thought of as coming by sparsio. 146 In form as well as name the tokens are thus seen to

be real sortes.

Quite as specific is the borrowed term

for sortes, tesserae, which means simply

“dice” or “tablets.” 147 Dice and tablets were used together at the primitive divination

shrines, where one would compare marks on

dice with those on tablets to learn his

fortune.148 Just so the value of a tessera could be realized only by matching it with

other symbols, the original tessera being employed as a ticket of identification which

admitted the holder to a feast when it

matched a like token kept by the giver of the

feast.149 For admission to public feasts every holder of a tessera had to have his name on

the bronze tablets or incisi kept on the Capitol.150 The interesting custom of admission to public feasts by ticket, though it has been ignored by scholars, is found at

archaic year-festivals everywhere, from the

festival tablets of the Sumerians151 and the arrows of the Asiatics (serving both as

tickets and as gaming pieces)152 to the wooden tags of the Scandinavian North153

and the laurel leaf tickets of the primitive

Greeks and Romans—which, incidentally,

bring us back to the strena. 154 Also widespread is the idea of registration in a

great list of incisi, a “Book of Life” opened at the foundation of the world, containing the names of those to whom life is given for the

new age. 155 To be written down in this book is to be admitted to the banquet of life, to

receive a tessera, “a white stone, and in the stone a new name written,” and with it a

share in the feast of the “hidden manna”

(Revelation 2:17), the food that falls from heaven.

Such was the economy of the mystery

feasts, which present indeed the closest

affinity to the rites of the ludi saeculares, the sowing festival, 156 including tesserae157 and sparsio. 158 At the Saturnalia feast of the Arval Brethren a gold coin was presented to

each of the guests as the gift of life itself.159

The sparsio of life-giving stones in the Deucalion legend follows upon a casting of

dice, which determines the method by which

the race is to be created and also the lot in

life of the persons thus begotten. 160 By a like sowing Cadmus, at the beginning of the

“Great Year,” produced a race of men

fittingly called Sparti. 161 It is only natural, as Wissowa points out in the case of Fortuna, 162

that people should come to think of one who

gives certain assurance of a boon as the

actual giver of the boon, and regard those tokens which merely promise life and

prosperity as the very gift itself: the die or sors which indicates the blessings of life to follow is not to be distinguished from the

seed from which those blessings spring. The

tessera, like the Oriental seal, gave one a place and a status in the world of men: it

was the gift of a grain tessera that assigned a slave his freedom and his place in a tribe. 163

As seal and tessera witness solemn

contracts between men and gods,164 the sparsio of itself is such a contract: on the giver’s part it promised a golden age of

peace and prosperity—this the sparsiones

songs make clear.165 As to the one who caught the falling gold, he accepted a

contract on his part166 and recognized the rule and dominion of his benefactor in

formal acclamations, found sometimes

actually written on the tesserae. 167

While the tesserae may be described variously as tickets, tablets, coins, or

seals, 168 they are particularly interesting as dice. They actually take the form of gaming

pieces in many instances,169 and on some of them the iactus venerius is indicated. 170 This last opens up a wide vista into the

background of the sparsio, for it recalls the old Roman custom of choosing a rex bibendi at feasts (the “king” being the first guest to throw the Venus), 171 a practice which can have been inspired only by the example and

tradition of choosing the rex Saturnalius, King of the Great Feast, by lot. 172 Dicing, it should be remembered, was legal at Rome

only during the Saturnalia. 173 The Venus also indicates the archaic background of those

tesserae lasciviae, which have shocked scholars as symbols of Roman degeneracy

and decline, 174 for it recalls a very

widespread and ancient legend of how the king during the New Year’s feast casts dice

with a stranger from the underworld for the

hand of a fair lady and the possession of the

kingdom.175 This legend appears in the oldest stratum of Roman tradition as the

story of Hercules and Acca Larentia, in

which the hero wins the lady and a feast by

dicing at the Saturnalia. 176 Not to pursue them further, the many and complex

connections between sortes, tickets, feasts, goddesses, and the rest may be summarized

in the herald’s order at the Greek revels:

“Come hither, . . . that Tyche may by lot tell each man where he is supposed to eat! ”177

We have discussed the sparsiones of the Romans only in a broad and general sense. If

the evidence is scarce enough to require such

treatment, it is also consistent enough to

support it. The multiple aspects of the

institution fit nicely together and may be

matched in every point with common practices of other peoples, the same peculiar

elements appearing in the same complex

combinations. We can therefore with

confidence answer the three questions

proposed at the outset of this study in the

following general but specific terms: (1) the

objects of the sparsiones were tokens

symbolic of life, health, strength, and

abundance, and were actually exchangeable,

as far as possible, for the tangible realization of these blessings; (2) they were given by the king or his counterpart—emperor,

magistrate, or paterfamilias—as the living

representative of the father and founder of

the race, by (3) being scattered like seed or

rain from a celestial station in a manner to

simulate the sowing of the race itself on the

day of creation, with all the blessings and

omens that rightly accompany such a

begetting and amid acclamations that joyfully

recognize the divine providence and miraculous power of the giver.

The sparsio is the authentic heritage of the Golden Age, the sublime economy of

which remains throughout antiquity, and

indeed in religious ideology down to the

very present, the ultimate basis of the social, economic, and political structure.

Notes

This article was originally published

in Classical Journal 40 (1945): 515-43.

Footnotes

^1. Treatment of the sparsiones must be sought for in works dealing primarily with other

things. The most instructive of these are

Michael Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae

(Aalen: Scientia, 1969); Joachim Marquardt,

Römisches Staatsverwaltung, 3 vols., 2d ed.

(Leipzig: Hirzel, 1885), 3:475-96; Ludwig Friedländer, Darstellungen aus der

Sittengeschichte Roms, 4 vols., 8th ed.

(Leipzig: Hirzel, 1910), 2:316-18; Ph. Fabia,

“Sparsio,” in Charles V. Daremberg and

Edmond Saglio, Dictionnaire des antiquités grecques et romaines, 6 vols. in 10 (Paris: Hachette, 1877-1919), 4:2:1418-19. The

ritual side of the sparsio is discussed at length by Martin P. Nilsson, Geschichte der griechischen Religion, 2 vols. (Munich: Beck, 1941), 1:110-25; Francis M.

Cornford, The Origin of Attic Comedy

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

1934), 100-102 and passim; Samson Eitrem,

Opferritus und Voropfer der Greichen und

Römer (Kristiania: Dybwad, 1915), 261-69.

Less important works are indicated in the

course of the present study.

^2. Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, is the classic treatment of the tokens, which he

also discusses in “Congiarium,” in RE 4:875-80. Berve, “Liberalitas,” in RE 13:86-93, also deals with the tokens, as does Martin

Lipenius in his extensive Strenarum Historia, in Johannes G. Graevius,

Thesaurus Antiquitatum Romanarum, 12

vols. (Rhen.: Halmam, 1694), 12:409-552.

^3. Types of bellaria are listed by Friedländer, Sittengeschichte Roms, 2:316-18.

^4. The liquid sparsio is discussed by Fabia,

“Sparsio,” in Daremberg and Saglio,

Dictionnaire des antiquités grecques et

romaines, 4:2:1418-19, with the exception of the oil, which figures in the old bridal

sparsio (see below, n. 31), and in certain primitive scrambles, see Servius,

Commentarius in Georgica 384.

^5. The blood of the October horse, mixed with the ashes of the Fordicidia calves, was

distributed to all the people and strewn over

the fields; see Georg Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer (Munich: Beck, 1912), 200-201; Franz Altheim, Terra Mater:

Unter-suchungen zur altitalischen

Religionsgeschichte (Giessen: Töpelmann, 1931), 121. The fullest treatment of these

bloody sparsiones is Samson Eitrem,

Beiträge zur griechischen Religionsgeschichte, 3 parts (Kristiania: Dybwad, 1917-19), 2:19-49. Both animals

in question had been the victims of violent

dismemberment, a wild tussle being held for

the right to sprinkle the blood of the horse;

in Sextus Pompeius Festus, De Verborum

Significatu Quae Supersunt cum Pauli

Epitome, ed. Wallace M. Lindsay (Leipzig: Teubner, 1913), 190-91. The Greek

pharmakoi were hung with objects used in sparsiones, such as figs, cakes, and so forth, and their own ashes were scattered, in

Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy, 55-56; see below, n. 118.

^6. Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 117; Theodor Mommsen, “Das romische

Gastrecht und die romische Clientel,”

Historische Zeitschrift 1 (1859): 340-41; cf.

“symbol” in James Murray, ed., Oxford

English Dictionary, 12 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1933).

^7. For a broad treatment of this subject, see Eitrem, Opferritus und Voropfer, 261-80;

Nilsson, Geschichte der griechischen Religion, 1:113-15; Edvard Lehmann,

“Erscheinungs- und Ideenwelt der Religion,”

in Alfred Bertholet and Edvard Lehmann,

eds., Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte, 2

vols., 4th ed. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1925), 1:26,

40-43.

^8. Scholiast to Persius, Satires V, 177-79.

^9. Ovid, Fasti I, 187-88: “‘Omen,’ ait [Janus],

‘causa est, ut res sapor ille sequatur, et

peragat coeptum dulcis ut annus iter.’” (“It is because of the omen,” said [Janus], ". . .

that the taste follows the event, and that the whole course of the year may be sweet like

its beginning.”)

^10. Whether or not the sigillaria and the dulces figuras scattered at the Saturnalia (Martial, Epigrams XIV, 222) were the same, as

some commentators on Statius, Silvae I, 6, 17, have maintained, originally representing

the body of the slain vegetation god

(Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy, 102), it is certain that as New Year’s gifts both

impart luck and prosperity. The principle of

substitution is very conspicuous in the sparsiones. The rule, in sacra simulata pro veris accipi (to accept imitation holy objects as though they were genuine), makes

possible, says Servius, Commentarius in

Aeneidem (Commentary on the Aeneid) II, 116, the use of models de pane vel cera (of bread or wax) for any costly object. Types

of substitution in sparsiones are discussed by Eitrem, Opferritus und Voropfer, 277-78.

A special coin takes the place at Rome of

every kind of food offering or contribution,

so that in time such terms as visceratio,

epulum, cibus, sportula, congiarium,

munus, and so forth, come to mean simply

“a coin”; vid. lexicons, Hug, “Sportula,” in RE 2:3:1884; Berve, “Liberalitas,” in RE

13:85, 88; Mommsen, “Das romische

Gastrecht und die romische Clientel,” 340-

42; Otto Toller, De Spectaculis, Cenis,

Distributionibus in Municipiis Romanis

Occidentis Imperatorum Aetate Exhibitis

(Altenburg: Bond, 1889), 77-90. This

substitution is very ancient with the Romans,

see Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer, 428-29; cf. Deuteronomy 14:23-26.

^11. Suetonius, Domitian 4; cf. Suetonius, Nero 11; Suetonius, Augustus 98.

^12. Joannes Malalas, Chronographia XIII, 322-23, in PG 97:481-84; Chronicon Paschale, in PG 92:641; cf. Plutarch, Crassus 2.

^13. Aristophanes, The Birds 725-52 (a typical year-song of the quête variety).

^14. Nilsson, Geschichte der griechischen Religion, 1:116-18, 439, 503.

^15. Sparsio rejuvenates (Aristophanes, Plutus 1197-207) and restores the dead; see Cicero,

De Legibus II, 25 [63]; cf. Eitrem,

Opferritus und Voropfer, 262.

^16. Propertius, Elegies IV, 2; cf. Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer, 287-88.

^17. The festival of Flora was a duplicate of that of Acca Larentia, Plutarch, Romulus 4-5; cf.

K. Schwenck, “Hercules und Acca

Larentia,” Rheinisches Museum 22 (1867): 129-31; Wilhelm H. Roscher “Acca

Larentia,” in Wilhelm H. Roscher,

Ausführliches Lexikon der griechen und römischen Mythologie, 7 vols. (Leipzig: Teubner, 1884-1937), 1:6; Altheim, Terra

Mater, 142-43), which was a chthonian

“Totenmahl” held on Midwinter Night; see

Macrobius, Saturnalia I, 10, 17; Varro, De Lingua Latina VI, 23-24; Gellius, Noctes Atticae (Attic Nights) VII, 7, 7; Plutarch, Romulus 4-5; and Plutarch, Quaestiones Romanae nos. 34-35.

^18. Scholiast to Persius, Satires V, 177-79; cf.

Altheim, Terra Mater, 136. This seems to have been the classic sparsio at Rome, for when in A.D. 217 such distributions were

abolished, the Floralia was specifically

excepted; see Marquardt, Römische

Staatsverwaltung, 3:497; Dio Cassius, LXXIX, 22, 1.

^19. The laurel switch was used in the water sparsiones that accompanied the sprinkling of ashes, blood, and bean-straw at the

Palilia; see Ovid, Fasti IV, 721-40; V, 675-80; Zosimus, Historia Nova VI, 6; cf.

Marquardt, Römische Staatsverwaltung,

3:248, n. 7. Is it possible that the word strena is to be referred to sterno, struo, rather than to the hypothetical * st(e)re

suggested by Alois Walde, Vergleichendes

Wörterbuch der indogermanischen

Sprachen, 3 vols. (Leipzig: de Gruyter, 1927-32), 2:627-28?

^20. See below, n. 81, passages describing the hypateia of the emperors at Constantinople.

^21. Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy, 58-69, 85-86, 90-102, is especially convinced that a

sparsio must follow a sparagmos (tearing, mangling) of the divine victim, with all the

connotations which Frazer has made

familiar. Cf. James G. Frazer, The Golden

Bough, 12 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1935), 7:214-69.

^22. Ancient tradition gave the bloodless form priority: Empedocles, in Hermann Diels,

Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 3 vols., 6th ed. (Zurich: Weidmann, 1951), 1:362-63,

frg. 128; Plutarch, Numa VIII, 8; cf. Eitrem, Opferritus und Voropfer, 273-74. Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer, 410, 412,

holds the strewing of meal to be the older form at Rome.

^23. E.g., in the clumsy strewing of bloodless offerings over animal victims (Dionysius of

Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities VII, 72, 15-18; Hyginus, Fabulae 277). The October horse was decked with bread, and human

victims were adorned with the bloodless

objects of the sparsiones, see Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy, 55-56. On the association of bloody and bloodless sparsio, cf. Eitrem, Opferritus und Voropfer, 261-80.

^24. Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 20-21, and in “Congiarium,” in RE 4:875, 880, is particularly insistent on this point, while

Berve, “Liberalitas,” in RE 13:82-83,

actually maintains that the sparsiones were not only strictly private, but entirely

spontaneous and devoid of any motive but

the desire for a little fun.

^25. Occasions listed by Rostovzeff,

“Congiarium,” in RE 4:878; cf. Terence, Phormio I, 41-51, on the gift days. On these occasions one gave a coin to each member

of the community (Pliny, Epistulae

[Epistles] X, 117; Plautus, Aulularia V, 107), or to a common fund (Georg

Wissowa, “Iuventas,” in Roscher,

Ausführliches Lexikon, 2:1:764; Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer, 58, 128, 135, 168), or received gifts from the same;

Terence, Phormio I, 41-51; Theodor

Mommsen, Römische Geschichte, 8 vols., 2d ed. (Berlin: Weidmann, 1856), 1:787, on

“Pfennigcollecten” at funerals.

^26. “Il n’y avait point de solennité au sein d’une famille riche qui ne fût célebrée par une

gratification au peuple, par un festin public

ou des jeux” (there was no celebration

observed by a rich family that was not also

marked by a gift to the people, by a public

festival or by games), in V. Duruy, “Du

régime municipal dans l’empire romain,”

Revue historique 1 (1876): 348. The

interested presence of all the race, living and dead, at these affairs is the subject of Erich Bethe, Ahnenbild und Familiengeschichte

bei Römern und Griechen (Munich: Beck,

1935), 1-5.

^27. Polybius, Histories VI, 53.

^28. Victor, De Viris Illustribus 15; Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities VIII, 58; Livy, II, 16, 7; cf. III, 18, 11; II, 61, 8-9; Dio Cassius, XXXIX, 64; XL, 49, 1-3;

XLVIII, 53, 5.

^29. Cf. Duruy, “Régime municipal dans l’empire romain,” 349, for references; Johann

Kirchmann, De Funeribus Romanorum

(Lübeck: Jauchius, 1625), 583-84. From

Livy, VIII, 22, 2-3, it is plain that Flavius’s distribution never would have been tolerated

on any other occasion than a funeral. The

compulsory public distribution is found in

ancient funeral practices elsewhere, e.g.,

Josephus, Jewish Wars II, 1.

^30. Victor, De Viris Illustribus 32 and 18; cf.

Pliny, Natural History XXI, 10, in which this public contribution accompanies an

actual shower of flowers. On showering the

dead with good things, especially grain, cf.

Eitrem, Opferritus und Voropfer, 261-80.

^31. Vergil, Eclogues VIII, 30, “Sparge, marite, nuces” (scatter, bridegroom, the nuts; cf.

Festus, Lindsay, ed., 178-79), is matched by

a like obligation put upon the bride;

Apuleius, Apologia 88; cf. Diodorus, XIII, 84; Pliny, Natural History XV, 86. Other wedding sparsiones were the scramble for the spina alba, which was broken up and distributed among the people tanquam vitae praesidia (cf. modern bride’s bouquet), and the sprinkling of the threshold with oil by the bride; Pliny, Natural History XXVIII, 135; Servius, Commentary on the Aeneid IV,

458, a custom still observed in Syria. The

private katachysmata (handfuls of figs, nuts, and so forth) that introduced a Greek

bridegroom or new-bought slave to his new

life (Aristophanes, Plutus 768) is not to be distinguished from the great public showers;

ibid., 794-822.

^32. On the showering of the victorious emperor or contestant by the people, cf. Herodian,

Histories VII, 10, 8; for the similar

phylloboloi (showering with leaves), cf.

Pindar, Pythian Odes IX, 123-25. The symbolism of the triumphal shower is

treated by Eitrem, Opferritus und Voropfer, 266-67, and Ludwig Deubner, “Die

Bedeutung des Kranzes im klassischen

Altertum,” Archiv für Religion-

swissenschaft 30 (1933): 79. Vortumnus, showered with fruits at the turn of the year,

was the prototype of the triumphator;

Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer,

287-88. On the scattering of gifts by the

victorious emperor, see below, n. 81.

^33. Lord Fitz R. Raglan, “Magic and Religion,”

Folklore 50 (1939): 129. Thus the symbolic nut shower of the wedding (Festus, Lindsay,

ed., 178) also appears in the year-rites of the Saturnalia (Martial, Epigrams V, 30, 8) and at funerals; see Eitrem, Opferritus und

Voropfer, 262-63. On the identity of funeral and triumph in ritual, cf. Ch. Picard, “Les

Bûchers sacrés d’Eleusis,” RHR 107 (1933): 137-54.

^34. Cf. Wilhelm Schmidt, Geburtstag im Altertum (Giessen: Töpelmann, 1908), 36-

37. All bellaria were of the nature of second tables (Gellius, Attic Nights XIII, 11, 7), which would make them necessarily New

Year’s rites at Rome; Athenaeus,

Deipnosophists XIV, 639; cf. Jane Harrison, Themis, 2d ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1927), 250-51. On the

significance of Roman festivals as

anniversaries, cf. André Piganiol,

Recherches sur les jeux romains

(Strasbourg: Librairie Istra, 1923), 145-48.

^35. The identity of birthday and New Year is especially evident in the economy of the

more ancient collegia. Thus the Arval Brethren and the Salii had the primary duty

of celebrating birthdays and the New Year

with identical rites, Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer, 345-47, and “Arvales Fratres,” in RE 2:1472-73, 1485. The

college of Aesculapius and Hygeia gave its

sparsiones out on the emperor’s birthday, the birthday of the college, and at the New

Year; Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae,

98. The identity of the emperor’s birthday

with the New Year (the official birthday of all Romans, for that matter, Wissowa,

“Arvales Fratres,” in RE 2:1485), is

emphasized by Statius, Silvae IV, 1-2. The genesia is at once birthday and “Totenfeier”

(Schmidt, Geburtstag im Altertum, 9-13, 37-45; Erwin Rohde, Psyche: The Cult of

Souls and Belief in Immortality among the

Greeks [London: Kegan Paul, 1925], 167), held at Rome for all the dead on Midwinter

Night (Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der

Römer, 233), when alone, says Macrobius, Saturnalia I, 10, 18, the cry of “Io

Saturnalia!” was legal. The Matronalia, on

March 1, the old Roman New Year,

resembled a birthday celebration in every

respect (Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der

Römer, 185), while every Roman bride

celebrated her marriage with coin- and cake-

tokens not on the marriage day, but at the

Compitalia at the end of the Saturnalia; see

ibid., 167-68.

^36. Malalas, Chronographia, in PG 97:481-82; Chronicon Paschale 262-63, in PG 92:641.

Cicero, Pro Archia Poeta XII, 30, shows how established the custom was. At all

periods the rewards for gifts of grain to the

people was a statue in one’s memory; Pliny,

Natural History XVIII, 15; Gellius, Attic Nights VII, 7, 1; Chronicon Paschale 391, in PG 92:1004. The statue and feast that went with it amounted to cult veneration,

writes W. Buckler, “A Charitable Foundation

of A.D. 237,” Journal of Hellenic Studies

57 (1937): 1-10; cf. Duruy, Régime

municipal dans l’empire romain,” 347;

Samuel Dill, Roman Society from Nero to

Marcus Aurelius (New York: Wold, 1905), 275.

^37. In all the above instances the statue marks the scene of such a feast. Not a single

instance is known in which a group observes

a memorial feast at its own expense (cf.

Schmidt, Geburtstag im Altertum, 37-38).

To be rich was to be a hero (Pausanias,

Description of Greece IV, 32, 2; Diodorus, XIII, 84 and 90). Such donatives were “a

manifestation of power and enhancement of

the personality” exalting the status of the giver to a superhuman level; cf. Athenaeus,

Deipnosophists X, 418B, and the discussion by Bronislaw Malinowski, Crime and

Custom in Savage Society (London: Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1926), 29; quote from the

latter.

^38. The definitive studies are by Georg Wissowa, “De Feriis Anni Romanorum

Vetustissimi Observations Selectae,” in

Geschichtliche Abhandlungen zur

römischen Religions- und Stadtgeschichte

(Munich: Beck, 1904), 154-74; Ludwig

Deubner, “Zur Entwicklungsgeschichte der

altrömischen Religion,” Neue Jahrbücher für das klassische Altertum 27 (1911): 321-35; Alfred von Domaszewski, “Die Festcyclen

des römischen Kalenders,” Archiv für

Religionswissenschaft 10 (1907): 333-34; and Eitrem, Beiträge zur griechischen

Religionsgeschichte, 2:19-22. All are in agreement that a single great festival was

either repeated or prolonged by installments

throughout the year; cf. Mommsen,

Römische Geschichte, 1:788.

^39. No one was allowed to be absent from the secular rites held in his generation, and no

one might live to behold those of another;

Zosimus, Historia Nova II, 5, 1; Suetonius, Divus Claudius 21; Acta Ludorum

Saecularium, lines 52-57, in Theodor

Mommsen, Gesammelte Schriften, 8 vols.

(Berlin: Weidmann, 1905-13; reprinted

1965), 8:572; cf. 578-80.

^40. E. Diehl, “Das Saeculum, seine Riten und Gebete,” Rheinisches Museum für

Philologie 83 (1934): 255-56; cf. Fritz Blumenthal, “Ludi Saeculares,” Klio 15

(1917-18): 242.

^41. Zosimus, Historia Nova II, 5. The redistribution appears” unsinning” to

Blumenthal, “Ludi Saeculares,” 232, and

puzzling to Mommsen, Gesammelte

Schriften, 8:596, but has been explained convincingly by Piganiol, Recherches sur les jeux romains, 92-101.

^42. Plutarch, Quaestiones Graecae no. 12; see William R. Halliday, The Greek Questions of

Plutarch (Oxford: Clarendon, 1928), 72-73.

On the primitive bringing of first-fruits to

Delphi, cf. Plutarch, Quaestiones Graecae

no. 35. The function of the god there was to

bestow equally crops and children;

Euripides, Io 301-3.

^43. See below, nn. 83, 86, 91. The ludi saeculares are the founder’s festival, the saeculum urbis conditae; Diehl, “Das

Saeculum, seine Riten und Gebete,” 370; cf.

371-72. The day of sowing is the day of

creation, for the Romans considered

“Erzeugung” and birthday one and the same

event; cf. Franz Altheim, “Altitalische und

altromische Gottesvorstellung,” Klio 30

(1937): 51.

^44. This subject has particularly engaged the attention of Albert Schwegler, Römische

Geschichte, 3 vols. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1884), 1:212-39; and Ludwig Preller, Römische

Mythologie, 2 vols. paginated sequentially, 2d ed. (Berlin: Weidmann, 1865), 92-146,

294-374, 401-501. Of the large Janus

literature, it is sufficient to cite the summary

of the god’s offices and his predominance in the economy of tokens and distributions

(Ovid, Fasti I, 185-86) by Otto Huth,

Janus: Ein Beitrag zur altrömischen

Religionsgeschichte (Bonn: Rohrscheid, 1932), 23 and passim. Does the Jano struem of Cato, De Agri Cultura 134, refer to the sparsio of cakes? The identity of New

Year’s distribution with feasts of the dead

and the gifts of the sower is generally

explained on the ground that the act of

opening the subterranean corn-bin is both a

chthonian and a New Year’s rite: this theory,

introduced by Otfrid Müller, has been

popular since its revival by William W.

Fowler, Religious Experience of the Roman

People from the Earliest Times to the Age

of Augustus (London: Macmillan, 1911) or The Roman Festivals of the Period of the

Republic (London: Macmillan, 1899); cf.

Stefan Weinstock, “Templum,” Römische

Mitteilungen 45 (1930): 115; W. Kroll,

“Mundus,” in RE 16:561-63; Martin P.

Nilsson, “Die Griechen,” in Bertholet and

Lehmann, Lehrbuch der

Religionsgeschichte, 2:297-98, 369; see below, n. 101.

^45. That the private sportulae were never bestowed in kind, as the public often were,

indicates their later origin; Hug, “Sportula,”

in RE 2:3:1885. Cicero, Epistulae ad Familiares XI, 28, speaks of distributions as private in the sense of having no

constitutional significance, i.e., as

nonpolitical; but there is no issue as to the

priority of private or public sparsio, since any liberalitas is meaningless unless the gift is made both (a) from private means and (b)

to parties outside one’s family circle. Thus

Augustus, in Monumentum Ancyranum I,

32-35, boasts:" populum universummis

impensis liberarem” (I freed the whole

people by my generosity), his private gift to

320,000 Romans being given on the very

public occasion of his assuming the tribunate

and consulship; ibid., III, 15-17. So Crassus

“out of his own means” fed all the Romans

for three months, but this again was to

celebrate a consulship (Plutarch, Crassus 2); so too with Caesar (Plutarch, Caesar 55-56).

^46. For sources, cf. Theodor Mommsen, “Sp.

Cassius, M. Manilius, Sp. Maelius, die drei

Demagogen des 3. und 4. Jahrhunderts der

römischen Republik,” Hermes 5 (1871):

228-71; and Schwegler, Römische

Geschichte, 3:132-36, 282-98. The Gracchi and even Caesar would come under this

head. Maelius expected to restore the

monarchy by giving but two pounds of grain

to every plebeian, a ridiculously small bribe, unless for the people it had a deeper

significance. Cf. ibid., 3:314-15.

^47. Cicero, De Officiis II, 61-64; Cicero, Epistulae ad Atticum I, 16, 12; Cicero, Pro Murena 36; cf. Tacitus, Annals IV, 62; Appian, Samnite History XI, 1, where he writes that to give money and gifts to the

populace is an archaic Roman tradition.

^48. Cicero, De Officiis II, 73, 77; Cicero, Pro Ligario VII, 23; Cicero, Epistulae ad Familiares IX, 13, 4; Cicero, Pro Rege

Deiotaro 26.

^49. Emphasized by Theodor Mommsen, De Collegiis et Sodaliciis Romanorum (Kiel: Libraria Schwersiana, 1843): 50-55; and

Mommsen, Römische Geschichte, 1:787.

^50. Sparsiones are never objected to on principle, but only because they have

become the plaything of the lowest classes;

Persius, Saturnalia V, 177; Minucius Felix, XI, 37. Epictetus, Discourses IV, 7, 22-24, objects to scrambling for figs and nuts since

dignified men do not scramble “for such

small stakes!”; cf. Cicero, Pro Murena 19; Appian, The Civil Wars V, 12-13, 128;

Cicero, De Officiis II, 57.

^51. Just as the popular burials in the Forum, though dreaded by the senate (Dio Cassius,

XXXIX, 64; XLVIII, 53, 5; cf. Livy, VIII,

22, 2-4), weathered every attack because

they were a primitive popular custom. Cf.

Lucan, Bellum Civile II, 222; David

Randall-MacIver, Villanovans and Early

Etruscans (Oxford: Clarendon, 1924), 73-83.

^52. Cf. Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 11, 39-40; Rostovzeff, “Congiarium,” in RE

4:876, 880; cf. Viktor E. Gardthausen,

Augustus und seine Zeit, 1 vol. in 3 parts (Leipzig: Teubner, 1891-96), 1:2:588; Otto

Hirschfeld, Untersuchungen auf dem

Gebiete der römischen

Verwaltungsgeschichte (Berlin: Weidmann, 1877), 120.

^53. No emperor could escape loud popular censure if he failed to give lavishly;

Suetonius, Divus Claudius 12; Zosimus, Historia Nova IV, 16; Plutarch, Galba 18, and so forth.

^54. See Berve, “Liberalitas,” in RE 13:89-90.

^55. The evidence is collected in Friedländer, Sittengeschichte Roms, 2:299-305.

^56. Thus, during the sparsiones, “tollunt innumeras ad astra voces Saturnalia principis

sonantes et dulci dominum favore clamant:

hoc solum vetuit licere Caesar” (they raise

countless voices to heaven proclaiming the

Saturnalia of the emperor and saluting their

lord with warm admiration; this alone Caesar

forbade)—Statius, Silvae I, 6, 81-84.

Augustus strictly forbade this dominus title (Suetonius, Augustus 53), as did Tiberius (Suetonius, Tiberius 27). According to Victor, De Caesaribus XXXIV, 4, Diocletian

“primus omnium post Caligulam

Domitiumque dominum se palam dici passus

et adorari se appellarique uti deum” (after

Caligula and Domitian, Diocletian was the

first of all of them who allowed himself to

be called “lord” [ dominus] openly and to be venerated and addressed as though he were

a god). Cf. Victor, De Caesaribus XI, 2, and Victor, Epitome III, 8; XI, 6. The dominus title would never have caused the scandal it

did, had it originated, as Theodor

Mommsen, Römisches Staatsrecht, 3 vols., 3d ed. (Leipzig: Hirzel, 1885-87), 2:760-63,

claims, in the old economy of the Roman

household, nor would it have been

inseparably connected with the title of deus (ibid.) had it referred strictly to the private relationship of servant and master.

^57. Cf. Thesaurus Linguae Latinae (Leipzig:

Teubner, 1934), s.v. “dominus”; Suetonius, Domitian 13.

^58. Suetonius, Domitian 13; cf. Livy, XXIII, 8, 6-7. When Trimalchio regales his guests with

a sparsio, they immediately interpret it as a religious donative stemming not from their

host but from the emperor: “Rati ergo

sacrum esse ferculum tam religiso apparatu

perfusum, consurreximus altius et ‘Augusto

patri patriae, feliciter’ diximus. Quibusdam

tamen etiam post hanc venerationem poma

rapientibus, et ipsi iis mappas implevimus.”

(We thought that it must be a sacred dish

that was drenched with such holy trappings;

we stood up straight and said, “May it go

well for Augustus the father of his country.”

But since many were grabbing for the fruit

even after this solemnity, we filled our

napkins ourselves.) Petronius, Satyricon 60.

^59. Claudius’s behavior at his revived version of the archaic year-feast, where he waited on

tables, addressed his guests as domini, and so forth (Suetonius, Divus Claudius 21), closely resembles that of King Cotys;

Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 131; cf. X, 439. At the Saturnalia (Macrobius,

Saturnalia I, 7, 26; Athenaeus,

Deipnosophists XIV, 639-40), as at the old sparsiones-festival of the Floralia (Dio Cassius, LVIII, 19, 1), the emperor was

treated in every way as a festival king. Since these celebrations are beyond doubt archaic,

the origin of the supreme office cannot be

dissociated from them (see below, n. 70).

^60. Aristophanes, Ecclesiazusae 1144-65; cf.

Altheim, Terra Mater, 19. At the Saturnalia the emperor keeps open house (Statius,

Silvae I, 6, 39-50).

^61. Amid all the vicissitudes of the late Republic the common people of Italy remained loyal

to the folk-memory of a Golden Age, and at

the end of the Republic were looking

forward with particular enthusiasm to the

return of the Saturnia regna. Cf. Guglielmo

Ferrero, Greatness and Decline of Rome, 5

vols. (New York: Putnam and Sons, 1909-

10), 2:339; Vergil, Eclogues 4.

^62. Cassiodorus, Variae VI, 18; Plutarch,

Pompey 28; Velleius Paterculus, Historiae Romanae II, 40.

^63. Preller, Römische Mythologie, 650, 653-54, 657. At Rome the prototype of the feast-giving year-king is Hercules, who takes the

place of the old local Cererius and Jovius as

sponsor of public feasts; cf. Piganiol,

Recherches sur les jeux romains, 121-25. It is he who presides over the food distribution

of the Ara Maxima, an event which

Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer,

277, holds to be the oldest public rite of the Romans: it was a true year-feast of

abundance, at which food was ostentatiously

thrown away; ibid., 278. Wissowa, in ibid.,

276-77, 282-83 (cf. 271), identifies this

Hercules with the autochthonous Garanus,

as in this same office he is identified with the old native sowing-god Semo Sancus;

Schwegler, Römische Geschichte, 4:346, 368-69, 375-76; Preller, Römische

Mythologie, 79, 238, 634, 637-38. “The ancients had a way of calling all mighty men

Hercules,” says Servius, Commentary on the

Aeneid VIII, 203, and everywhere the hero appears as the year-king; Dio Chrysostom, Orations I, 50-74; Schwenck, “Hercules und Acca Larentia,” 129-31; cf. Michael

Rostovzeff, Mystic Italy (New York: Holt, 1927), 137, on Hercules as the great mysta.

Even the Oriental year-king, as Ningizzida,

Ninurta, Ningirsu, Tammuz, and so forth,

“seems to be in possession of all the

attributes of Herakles,” Henri Frankfort,

“Gods and Myths on Sargonid Seals,” Iraq

1 (1934): 14.

^64. Appian, Civil Wars III, 21, 23-24; cf.

Kenneth Scott, “The Political Propoganda of

44-30 B.C.,” Memoirs of the American

Academy in Rome 11 (1933): 7-49.

^65. Cicero, Philippics II, 84-85; Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 148.

^66. Mommsen, Römische Geschichte, 3:290-91.

^67. Dio Cassius, L, 10, 2; Florus, Epitome II, 13; Suetonius, Caesar 79. Caesar’s public feasts, given on a royal scale (Plutarch,

Caesar 5), are described as archaic by

Ausonius, Technopaegnion IX, 5.

^68. Plutarch, Caesar LV, 57; Tacitus, Annals I, 2.

^69. Herodotus, History, I, 126. On Cyrus as the model year-king, cf. Alfred Jeremias, The

Old Testament in the Light of the Ancient

East, 2 vols. (London: Williams and

Norgate: 1911), 2:231-32, 274-76.

^70. In that way the gardener Ellil-banai became king of Babylon in grauer Vorzeit (in the mists of time); Bruno Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, 2 vols. (Heidelberg: Winter, 1925), 2:99. At Tarsus the Epicurean Lysias,

chosen “crown wearer” (Priest of Heracles),

refused to give up the insignia after the

festival and made himself absolute tyrant,

“first of all dividing the wealth of the rich

among the poor, killing all who refused to

contribute”; Athenaeus, Deipnosophists V, 215. Later, when the people of that city

formed factions, they crowned Cassius and

Dolabella as rival kings; Appian, Civil Wars IV, 64. Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy,

26, has very plausibly suggested that the

famous ruse of Pisistratus and his

masquerade-Athena succeeded because, insofar as it concerned the old year-king, he

could rely “on the conception being familiar

to the simple-minded folk in ritual.” When

Timaeus wanted to become king of Cyzicus,

he began by “bestowing a largess of money

and grain upon his fellow citizens”;

Athenaeus, Deipnosophists XI, 509. The formula was followed in Sicyon, where “the

king receives honors and in turn gives gifts”

of land, grain, and money to everyone (Livy,

XXXII, 40, 8-9). Distributions as a rule

follow confiscations, as in the case of

Molpagoras at Cius (Polybius, Histories XV, 21, 1-2), Charops in Epirus (ibid., XXXII,

5), Chaeron at Sparta (ibid., XXIV, 7, 2-3),

Phintias in Sicily (Diodorus, XXII, 2), Nabis

at Sparta (ibid., XXVII, 1), and so forth. In

Roman legend there are many traces of such

practice. When all the people chose Tullus

Hostilius king, he divided up all the royal

lands among them (Dionysius of

Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities III, 1), following the example of Romulus himself,

who willed to each Roman a couple of jugera as an heredium (Varro, De Re Rustica I, 10, 2). King Numa “abolished poverty by force” when he gave to the

masses “all the land which Romulus had

won by the spear”; Plutarch, Numa 16.

When Sextus, son of Tarquin, became King

of Gabii, he “destroyed the more influential

citizens and distributed their wealth among

the populace”; Zonaras, Annals VII, 10.

Lepidus had the people plunder and divide

the effects of all who opposed his (royal)

triumph, Appian, Civil Wars IV, 5, 31.

^71. Cf. Diehl, “Das Saeculum, seine Riten und Gebete,” 348-52. It was at the great year-festival of the Gauls at Lyons that Drusus

induced these people to accept Augustus as

ruler and god; it is evident from the ease

with which this plan succeeded that he was

following a pattern as familiar to the Gauls

as the secular celebration was to the

Romans; H. W. Lawton, “The Religion of

the Gallo-Romans,” in Speculum Religionis: Studies in Honor of Claude G. Montifiore

(Oxford, Clarendon, 1929), 73.

^72. Such symbolic titles are very common, e.g., Martial, Epigrams XII, 62, 1-4; Statius, Silvae I, 6, 2; IV, 1: Vergil, Bucolics I, 6-7; Seneca, Epistulae I, 73; Claudianus

Mamertus, Panegyrics V, 2; VI, 1;

Cassiodorus, Variae VI, 4; IX, 17; XII, 11; Corippus, Justin IV, 165-74; Nicolaus

Damascenus, Vita Caesaris 12, and so

forth. The familiar concept of the king as the ultimate source of the food supply,

expressed in these passages, needs no

discussion. “AUG" on coins “in effect raises the Emperor to the level of a symbol

typifying, in a more than earthly capacity,

the blessings which the more humble of the

earth may enjoy”; C. H. V. Sutherland, “The

Historical Evidence of Greek and Roman

Coins,” Greece and Rome 9 (February

1940): 74. Caesar was the first Roman to

put his own image on coins, an honor

reserved before that time for deity; ibid., 72.

^73. Cassiodorus, Variae III, 29.

^74. Berve, “Liberalitas,” in RE 13:90.

^75. Herodian, Histories V, 6, 9.

^76. Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews XIX, 1, 5.

^77. R. Lepsius, Denkmäler, 3:103-9; reproduced in E. A. W. Budge, A History of Egypt from the End of the Neolithic Period to the

Death of Cleopatra, 8 vols. (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1902), 4:121, 123;

cf. 127: the gifts include all the fruits of the earth, but also many ankh tokens, showing that the god is bestowing life itself.

^78. Dio Cassius, LIX, 25, 1-5: Gaius had ordered a high bema erected on the shore and from it supervised his soldiers as they

gathered shells from the beach, following a

mock combat. Then he gave them rich

presents, as if they had won a great victory,

and marched with the booty back to Rome,

where he immediately mounted another

platform to watch the people gathering silver

and gold in the same manner. The whole

story of the farcical British expedition, with its island objective, its mock combats, its

triumph and collecting of shells and gold,

and so forth, closely resembles Alexander’s

mythical expedition to the underworld (Pseudo-Callisthenes, Life of Alexander II, 41), a tradition with an Oriental year-rite

background (cf. Julius Zacher,

Pseudocallisthenes [Halle: Buchhan-dlung des Walsenhauses, 1867], 141-42); also

Octavian’s unsuccessful attempt to satisfy

his soldiers with such a token triumph;

Appian, Civil Wars V, 13, 128.

^79. Cicero, Philippics II, 16.

^80. Besides sparsiones, memorial speeches were given from the rostra (Polybius, Histories VI, 53, 2), where stood the golden statue of

Memory (Cicero, Philippics II, 84).

Herodotus, History IV, 26, describes the same remarkable combination of sparsio,

memorial rites, and golden statue among the

Scythians, and compares it with the Western

genesia. The actual distribution of the dismembered body of the defunct in the

Eastern rite may well represent the original

form of the visceratio or Roman funeral distribution of meat (Livy, VIII, 22, 2;

XXXIX, 46, 2; cf. above n. 21). The older

rostra, to which Cicero refers (Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer, 77), was the seat of Lupercus (Cicero, Philippics II, 84; Suetonius, Caesar 79), and stood on the site of the earlier Volcanal, a raised platform from which the kings would address the

people (references in Samuel B. Platner and

Thomas Ashby, A Topographical

Dictionary of Ancient Rome [London:

Oxford University Press, 1929], 583). Livy,

XXXIX, 46, 5; XL, 19, 2, tells of showers

of blood in Area Vulcani, implying that the

spot was actually the scene of bloody

sparsiones. For another type of chthonian sparsio taking place there, see below, n.

116.

^81. Heliogabalus varied the platform routine with the golden chariot; Herodian, Histories V, 6, 6-9. The solar costume went with both, for

at Constantinople the emperors wore it for

their chariot sparsiones (Theophanes,

Chronographia, anno 791; Cedrenus, I, 710). In a relief from an ivory plaque one

sees the deified emperor in a chariot

mounted on a very high wooden platform hung with draperies (cf. fig. 118, p. 117);

Henri Leclerq, "Éléphant,” in Fernand

Cabrol and Henri Leclercq, Dictionnaire

d’archéologie chrétienne et de liturgie, 15

vols. (Paris: Letouzey et Ané, 1907),

4:2656; cf. Herodian, Histories, IV, 2, 1-4; Lucius Ampelius, VIII, 19. Representations

of exalted chariots are very common (see

fig. 11, p. 117 in this volume).

^82. The Babylonian year-god scatters seed from his heavenly car or mountain top; cf. below,

n. 91. His special symbol is the plow (V.

Scheil, “La Charrue Symbole de Ningirsu,”

Revue d’Assyriologie et d’Archéologie

Orientale 34 [1937]: 42), which identifies him with year-gods everywhere (cf.

Frankfort, “Gods and Myths on Sargonid

Seals,” 13-14), notably with Triptolemus

(Hyginus, Fabulae 147, with specific

reference to sparsiones), of whom Arthur B.

Cook, Zeus, 3 vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1925), 1:214, 225,

observes “a remarkable similarity between

the equipment of Triptolemus and that of Dionysus,” including chariot and plow.

^83. Herodotus, History IV, 5: the sacred gold of the Scythians fell from the sky at the

creation, along with a plow. The one able to

take up this gold was declared king.

^84. Of great antiquity is the story of Lo(v)ernius, Luernes, Ariamnes, etc., who feasted all the

Celts for a year and was acclaimed leader

and benefactor of the race as he “drove his

chariot across the fields, scattering gold and silver for the thousands of Celts who

followed him”; Athenaeus, Deipnosophists

IV, 152; Strabo, Geography IV, 2, 3.

^85. Cf. Hyginus, Fabulae 147. The practice of scattering seeds and chopped straw in the

wake of a plow or wagon at New Year’s still

survives in Northern Greece; Cornford,

Origin of Attic Comedy, 63.

^86. The Greek custom is found among the Germans as well (Jacob Grimm, Teutonic

Mythology, tr. James S. Stallybrass, 3 vols.

[London: Bell, 1883], 1:275-76), imitating in

this case the Earth-Goddess and/or her

consort, who ride through the sky on Midwinter Night scattering shavings and

straw from their wagon or plow, bits which

on being picked up turn to gold; cf. Pseudo-

Callisthenes, Life of Alexander II, 41; Stith Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk-Literature

(Bloomington: Indiana University Press,

1932-36), F342.

^87. The chariot of the triumphator is that of Jupiter himself; Ludwig Deubner, “Die

Tracht des römischen Triumphators,”

Hermes 69 (1934): 320. It is also the royal chariot (Velleius Paterculus, Historiae

Romanae II, 40) and the victorious chariot of the games, to judge from Suetonius,

Vespasian 5.

^88. This quadriga had been placed by Romulus himself in the temple of Vulcan (Dionysius

of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities II, 54, 2; cf. Platner and Ashby, Topographical

Dictionary, 583), the source of the archaic sparsiones (see above, n. 80). It goes back to the time when Vulcan ruled before the

arrival of Jove, Jérôme Carcopino, Vergile et

les origines d’Ostie (Paris: de Boccard, 1919), 98-102.

^89. Plutarch, Publicola 13; cf. Emil Aust, Die Religion der Römer (Münster: Aschendorff, 1899), 49-55.

^90. Martial, Epigrams VIII, 78, 7-12; Statius, Silvae I, 6, 9-10; 20-27; Ovid, Fasti I, 185-86, and so forth.

^91. To cases cited above in nn. 83-86 may be added the golden sparsiones (soma, rice, butter, gold, and so forth) of the

Aśvamedha, the archaic New Year’s

celebration of India; Paul É. Dumont,

L’Aśvamedha (Paris: Geuther, 1927), v-viii, 252-53. This rite has been identified with the oldest Sumerian year-practices by William F.

Albright and Paul É. Dumont, “A Parallel

between Indic and Babylonian Sacrificial

Ritual,” JAOS 54 (1934): 107-28; cf. the Babylonian sprinklings of honey and milk in

Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, 2:238-39. For interesting Armenian sparsiones, cf.

Zabelle C. Boyajian, Armenian Legends and

Poems (London: Dent and Sons, 1916), 49,

commenting on Moses of Khorene. At the Persian creation golden streams flow down

and a golden shower falls from heaven to

earth; Albert J. Carnoy, “Iranian Views of

Origins in Connection with Similar

Babylonian Beliefs,” JAOS 36 (1916): 301; and Albert J. Carnoy, Iranian Mythology,

vol. 6 in Louis H. Gray, ed., Mythology of All Races, 13 vols. (Boston: Jones, 1917), 299-300. For the flowing gold of the Ras

Shamra ritual texts, cf. George A. Barton,

“The Second Liturgical Poem from Ras

Shamra,” JAOS 55 (1935): 38-44. At the founding of Athens and the birth of Athena,

Zeus sent a shower of gold over the place

(Pindar, Olympian Odes VII, 8 and 50). The cases of Danae and others will come to

mind. The golden tears of the goddess give

life to the world as rain; J. Rendell Harris,

Picus Who Is Also Zeus (Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press, 1916), 45-47;

cf. Pausanias, Description of Greece II, 31, 14.

^92. In the chariot sparsiones cited above, n. 81,

it is specifically reported that the chariot was of gold; cf. Pindar, Olympian Odes I, 37-41.

^93. Martial, Epigrams VIII, 33, 3-4; and in Martial, Liber Spectaculorum II, 3; for saffron, Martial, Epigrams V, 25, 7-8. The throne of Lupercus on the rostra (see above,

n. 80) was the sella aurea; Cicero,

Philippics II, 3; cf. Pindar, Nemean Odes I, 37.

^94. This theme is treated by Fabia, “Sparsio,” in Daremberg and Saglio, Dictionnaire des

antiquités grecques et romaines 4:2:1419; on gilding, cf. Rostovzeff, Römische

Bleitesserae, 116; Martial, Epigrams XIII, 27; cf. Mirabilia Romae I, 4 on the “golden bread,” reminding one of the Dutch-gold on

the gingerbread figures at old-world fairs.

^95. Dumont, L’Aśvamedha, 249; cf. 15-16. Of the importance of gold as a universal luck-and fertility-charm nothing need here be

said.

^96. It is so described by Statius, Silvae I, 6, 40; cf. Vergil, Eclogues IV, 6-10, where “nova progenies caelo demittitur alto” (a new

generation is sent down from heaven on high) refers, of course, to the gens aurea of line 9.

^97. It is the marriage of “the Earth-Mother and the Heaven-Father, whose rain falls in a life-giving stream into the womb of Earth”;

Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy, 19; cf.

Morris Jastrow, “Sumerian and Akkadian

Versions of Beginnings,” JAOS 36 (1916): 290-95, and the broad treatment by G. W.

Elderkin, “The Marriage of Zeus and Hera

and Its Symbol,” American Journal of

Archaeology 41 (1937): 424-35. Water in the New Year’s rites has a special fertilizing power, discussed by A. J. Wensinck, “The

Semitic New Year and the Origin of

Eschatology” Acta Orientalia 1 (1922): 164-65 and passim. In the Indian year-rites

“water is seed”; F. Max Müller, ed., The

Upanishaas, 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1879-84), 1:238-39. In the ancient Easter

rite the wax of the Easter Taper “is dropped

into the font in the form of a cross, and the

candle itself is dipped into it. . . . Then the

people are sprinkled with this Easter water”

(Henry J. Feasey, Ancient English Holy

Week Ceremonial [London: Baker, 1897], 238-39), while the wax of the taper itself

may be distributed among the multitude in

the form of little wafer-tokens to bring

prosperity for the year; ibid., 203-4. Greek

sparsiones were accompanied by liberal water lustrations over the multitude;

Aristophanes, Pax 962-72; cf. Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy, 101-2. The liquid and flower showers of the Isis cult

(Apuleius, Metamorphoses XI, 9) and the sprinkling of Nile water in the same

(Servius, Commentary on the Aeneid II, 116, and IV, 512) certainly have the same

significance as the life-giving “drop” of the

Egyptian New Year. The sprinkling of the

life-giving water by the Pharaoh at the great

year-festival (the Sed Festival) is often

depicted in murals and reliefs; for example,

see Edouard H. Naville, Festival-Hall of

Osorkon II (London: Kegan, Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1892), pl. XI and p. 24. Befeuchter

and Befruchter are concepts identical with those of the ancients; Altheim, Terra Mater, 150; Preller, Römische Mythologie, 335. Cf.

G. Dossin, “Un rituel due culte d’Istar,”

Revue d’Assyriologie 35 (1938): 9.

^98. From the golden horde of Demeter came the sparsiones of the Thalysia; Homer, Iliad 9:534; Nilsson, Geschichte der griechischen Religion, 1:117; Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy, 27. Frigg, or Freyja, was called Folla, Abundia, Dame Habonde, and so

forth, because “she bestowed prosperity and

abundance on mortals”; she kept “the divine

mother’s chest ( eski), out of which gifts were showered upon [the people]"; Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, 1:308. This treasure was “the gold of Frigg”; ibid., 1:307. The

treasure chamber of the goddess always

appears in close connection with the royal

marriage motif (Cornford, Origin of Attic

Comedy, 26-27), of which the story of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba in its

numerous Oriental versions is perhaps the

most instructive instance, though the reader

may recall various Celtic legends of the same intent, such as Geoffrey of

Monmouth, Historia Regum Britanniae II, 14; cf. Herodotus, History II, 121-26; II, 135; I, 187, and so forth.

^99. This was the penus (provisions) of the community and the arca pontificum

(treasury of the pontifices), from which

festival expenses were paid; Wissowa,

Religion und Kultus der Römer, 407, 471.

After half the blood of the October horse

had been sprinkled, the other half was stored

there for future sparsiones (ibid., 145; see above, n. 5).

^100. Ibid., 300; it was the “Archiv und Kasse”

into which all fines were paid, and from

which the cura annonae was administered; cf. ibid., 302, 297; cf. Altheim, Terra Mater, 118; Piganiol, Recherches sur les jeux

romains, 2, 12, 85, 91, 101, and so forth; Fowler, The Roman Festivals of the Period

of the Republic, 74-79.

^101. In connection with the sparsiones the goddess appears most often as Fortuna (see

below, nn. 141-46) and as Annona: the Annona Augusti Ceres of the Imperial coins representing “Ceres . . . in her guise as

Imperial Corn Supply”; Sutherland, “Greek

and Roman Coins,” 74-75. Annona is the

emissary (Oehler, “Annona,” in RE 1:2320), and the indigitamentum of Ceres; Georg Wissowa, “Annona,” in Roscher,

Ausführliches Lexikon, 1:360; Berve,

“Liberalitas,” in RE 13:89-90. Ceres

received and dispensed the praemitiae as archaic patroness of the cura annonae and of the primitive games (see above, n. 100).

Her mate is the year-god Janus-Cerus; Huth,

Janus, 22-23, 93; Wilhelm Roscher,

“Ianus,” in Roscher, Ausführliches Lexikon, 2:1:30; Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der

Römer, 103-4, 109; and it has often been noted that her festival was the year-festival (Piganiol, Recherches sur les jeux romains, 91; Fowler, Roman Festivals, 74-79), the primitive year being marked by the opening

and shutting of her subterranean corn bin;

see above, n. 44; cf. Altheim, “Altitalische

und altromische Gottesvorstellung,” 47-50; Wissowa, “De Feriis Anni Romanorum

Vetustissimi,” 154-55. The name Annona

refers specifically to the yearly office of distribution.

^102. Ovid, Fasti V, 221; on Flora as Ceres, cf.

Altheim, Terra Mater, 132-33.

^103. The treasury of the goddess is also that of Pluto, and the counterpart of the heavenly

treasury of Zeus; Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy, 27; Aristophanes, Plutus 131-34.

Lydus, De Mensibus IV, 85, argues that Pluto is the Sun in the underworld with

Kore, who personifies “that power which is

upon the seeds as they fall from heaven to

earth.” At all times the substance of the

Roman sparsiones was taken in theory from the aerarium Saturnii (Oehler, “Annona,” in RE 1:2319), and Saturn’s temple was the city treasury; Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer, 57. In the East the waters of heaven and those of the underworld are

identical, and the gold shower is supplied

from a heavenly rain-pond, which is at the

same time the water of the abyss; cf.

Lehmann, “Erscheinungs- und Ideenwelt der

Religion,” in Bertholet and Lehmann,

Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte, 1:105-6; and Edvard Lehmann, “Die Perser,” in

Bertholet and Lehmann, Lehrbuch der

Religionsgeschichte, 2:228.

^104. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar (Oxford: Clarendon, 1927), 296, cites

references to this.

^105. Anton Deimel, Sumerische Grammatik (Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1924),

119; cf. 110: “von Phallus überschüssiger

Kraft, vom Hause des Sturmflutes, vom

Gebirge, dem heiligen Orte werde ich dir

[i.e., the King] einen Wind schicken: das

Land wird er mit Lebenshauch

beschencken.” It is the goddess who brings

forth this shower; Jastrow, “Sumerian and

Akkadian Versions of Beginnings,” 292-93.

^106. Hammurabi Code, Prologue, cols. 2-4; Robert F. Harper, Code of Hammurabi

(Chicago: University of Chicago, 1904), 5-9.

The Persian god sits in heaven “on a golden

throne . . . with hands overflowing”; Carnoy, Iranian Mythology, 229-300.

^107. Psalms 78:23-29 (for the New Year); cf.

Malachi 3:10.

^108. Cf. Wensinck, “Semitic New Year and the Origin of Eschatology” 158-99; Feasey,

Ancient English Holy Week Ceremonial, 55-72.

^109. “Domine aperi fenestram. Sol veni! Luna veni! Nubes celestis cum manna veni!”

(Henri Leclerq, “Laudes Pueriles,” in Cabrol

and Leclercq, Dictionnaire d’archéologie

chrétienne et de liturgie, 8:2:1913.)

^110. Feasey, Ancient English Holy Week Ceremonial, 74, 76-77; cf. 58.

^111. Suetonius, Augustus 98. As princeps iuventutis (Augustus, Monumentum

Ancyranum III, 1-6) he would distribute tokens marked MAG(ister) IUVENT(utis);

Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 59; cf.

Hubert Démoulin, “Encore les collegia

iuvenum,” Musée Belge 3 (1899): 177-92.

^112. Henri Leclerq, “Annone,” in Cabrol and

Leclercq, Dictionnaire d’archéologie chrétienne et de liturgie, 1:2275-76, fig.

776. Leclercq’s explanation is that “deux

génies couvrent les époux de fleurs” (two

geniuses are showering the married couple

with flowers), although the objects on the

strings in no way resemble flowers, and the

strings are not held lightly like garlands, but are clutched firmly and hang straight, though

at odd angles, as if they were being shaken.

^113. Plutarch, Romulus 11. The best-known example is that of the Lacus Curtius, into

which every Roman tossed a coin or fruit

offering “quotannis ex voto pro salute eius”

(each year in fulfillment of a vow for his

welfare); Suetonius, Augustus 57; cf. Livy, VII, 6, 3-6; Propertius, Elegies IV, 2, 61.

The mouth of the underworld was the

mundus, which has been persistently

identified with the subterranean public silo

from which the grain distributions were

made, the mundus Cereris (Festus, Lindsay,

ed., 144; Macrobius, Saturnalia I, 16-18; see above, n. 101).

^114. “Diese Sitte der Münzspende an Quellen und Flüsse geht durch die ganze antike

Welt,” according to Franz Dölger, “Die

Münze im Taufbecken und die

Münzenfunde in Heilquellen der Antike

Kultur- und Religionsgeschichtliches zum

Kanon 48 der Synode von Elvira in

Spanien,” in Antike und Christentum, 6

vols. (Münster: Aschendorff, 1929), 3:13,

who has treated the subject extensively;

ibid., 3:1-24. Additional instances of the

throwing of year-offerings into the abyss of

the netherworld are to be found in Sozomen,

Historia Ecclesiastica (Ecclesiastical

History) 2, 4; Gregory of Tours, De Gloria Confessorum 2, in PL 71:830-31; Pausanias, Description of Greece I, 18, 7; VII, 24, 2; III, 23, 9; III, 26, 1 (this Ino is identified with the Roman Mater Matuta in ritual; cf.

Schirmer, “Leukothea,” in Roscher,

Ausführliches Lexikon, 2:2:2012); Lucian, De Syria Dea (On the Syrian Goddess) 12, and so forth. The Demeter pigs of the

Thesmophoria were thrown into a pit before

being scattered over the fields, according to Gilbert Murray, Five Stages of Greek

Religion (Oxford: Clarendon, 1925), 30.

^115. Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer, 429. One is reminded of the Greek

katabolia, the act of contributing one’s offering to a public feast by throwing it onto the common pile; Athenaeus,

Deipnosophists VII, 362; Johann Tzetzes, Ad Hesiodum 2.

^116. Cf. H. J. Rose, “The Cult of Volkanus at Rome,” Journal of Roman Studies 23

(1933): 58-61; J. Toutain, “Sur un rite

curieux et significatif du cult de Vulcain

Rome,” RHR 103 (1931): 136-37.

^117. Leviticus 5; 8:26-30; 14:6-7, 16; 23:11, 20, and so forth. These rites are a complicated

series of throwing, waving, sprinkling, and

mixing of oil, blood, water, bits of meat, and fruits of the earth, with much liquid sparsio over altar, priests, and congregation. They

are full of instructive parallels which cannot be treated here.

^118. As seen in the scattering of ashes to the

winds, in which every vestige of the object of sacrifice follows the course of the flame

and smoke to the other world. The ashes of

various “vegetation gods” were sown abroad

in true sparsiones; Jane Harrison,

Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

1908), 97-98. On burning as a means of

banishment, cf. Pausanias, Description of

Greece II, 10, 1.

^119. Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy, 55-56; Eitrem, Opferritus und Voropfer, 280-94.

^120. Roman practices of banishment recall the Hittite system, which puts things “on the

road to the Sungod in the Underworld” by

throwing them into a fire, a stream, or a pit; Albrecht Götze, Kleinasien (Munich: Beck, 1933), 146-47. The Sumerian compound for

“dedicate,” “sacrifice,” is a-ru, literally

“throw into the water,” writes Deimel,

Sumerische Grammatik, 42. Objects tossed into the year-fires of Europe (Grimm,

Teutonic Mythologie, 1:43) were also cast into holy fountains, both acting as “Bote

zwischen der göttlichen und der menschlichen Welt” (a messenger between

the divine and the human worlds); Paul

Herrmann, Altdeutsche Kultgebräuche

(Jena: Diederichs, 1928), 33; cf. 40, 59. The

year-fire itself is transmitted from heaven by a burning-glass, a “type of the Orient on

high,” passing from the world above to that

below without any contact of the two;

Feasey, Ancient English Holy Week

Festival, 187-88, 180-81.

^121. Eitrem, Opferritus und Voropfer, 282-90; Rose, “Cult of Volkanus at Rome,” 61; Paul

Radin, Social Anthropology (New York:

McGraw-Hill, 1932), 306. The throwing of

food or stones keeps the spirits at a distance either by satisfying them (Cerberus) or

scaring them off; cf. Thompson, Motif-

Index of Folk-Literature, H331; R231

(Atalanta motif); G512. With the sparsio as a form of combat (e.g., confetti) the present

study is not concerned. It will be enough to

note that the adorea of kisses, flowers, fruits, and vegetables (Plutarch, Cato Minor

46) thrown to actors in the theater could, if an actor did badly, take the form of a

shower of stones: in either case it was a

sparsio; but Franciscus B. Ferrarius, De Veterum Acclamationibus et Plausu, in Graevius, Thesaurus Antiquitatem

Romanorum, 6:82-88, warns against

confusing ritual combats with stoning rites

(cf. Eitrem, Opferritus und Voropfer, 290).

^122. The spirits were waiting to snatch it: they were the Harpies, the rapacious dead;

Kirchmann, De Funeribus Romanorum,

578-80; Georg Weicker, Der Seelenvogel in

der alten Litteratur und Kunst (Leipzig: Teubner, 1902), 20. In Babylonia the stray

animals that snatched food from the ground

were “the shadow-spirits of the dead”;

Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, 1:419.

To appease such the Philageians would carry

some crumbs from the year-feast;

Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 149C; cf.

Franz Dölger, “Die Eucharistie als

Reiseschutz: Die Eucharistie in den Händen

der Laien,” In Antike und Christentum,

5:232-47, 258. After the German year-feast the crumbs were scattered over the fields

with cries of “wôld! wôld!” (Grimm,

Teutonic Mythology, 1:156), the sowing of the fields and the feeding of the dead being

the same act; Eitrem, Opferritus und

Voropfer, 262. For the Pythagoreans all food that fell from the table passed tois ērōsi and could not be used by mortals; Diels,

Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 1:463;

Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent

Philosophers VIII, 34. Whatever is thrown or dropped is lost to this world, whatever is

caught is gained; Pausanias, Description of Greece I, 17, 3; Aelius Spartianus, Hadrian XXVI, 7.

^123. Hecate takes a deipnon from the rich to feed the poor, who must snatch the food

before it is set down; Aristophanes, Plutus 594-99; Joannes Tzetzes, Commentarii in

Aristophanem, vol. 6:1 of Scholia in Aristophanem, ed. W. J. W. Koster

(Groningen: Wolters, 1960), 142. The

crumbs for Hecate (see Gulick’s note on

Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 149C; cf.

III, 110C) were a sort of Hygeia-bread, like

the cakes of the Kollyridian rites; Franz

Dölger, “Heidnische und christliche

Brotstempel mit religiösen Zeichen: Zur

Geschichte des Hostienstempels,” in Antike und Christentum, 1:13-14. The remnants of the Christian agape, heavenly food, were distributed among the poor; Evagrius,

Ecclesiastical History IV, 36, in PG

86:2:2769; I. Bekker, ed., Georgius

Cedrenus 1:686-88, as were the untouchable remains of the great Slavic year-feast for the dead; Jan Machal, Slavic Mythology, vol. 3

in Gray, Mythology of All Races (Boston: Jones, 1918), 236. In Israel what fell from

the sacred bread-fruit tree in the temple

could be picked up only by the poor;

Babylonian Talmud Pesah 52b; cf. the

gleaning-law, Leviticus 19:9-10. Eitrem,

Opferritus und Voropfer, 263-64, 267, gives other cases in which “die Armen vielfach

den Platz der Totenseelen eingenommen”

(the poor took the place of the dead).

^124. Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, 1:273-74, 282. Unless the god unexpectedly lets fall a

shoe or ring, and so forth, from his statue,

these must be snatched from him unawares

by one who would obtain prosperity; ibid.,

1:114, n. 2. Cf. such year-motifs as

Gilgamesh snatching the tablets of Destiny,

Prometheus stealing fire, and so forth. The

throwing or accidental dropping of a spindle

into running streams at the New Year

gratifies the earth-goddess; cf. Adolf Wuttke, Der deutsche Volksaberglaube der

Gegenwart (Berlin: Wiegandt and Grieben, 1900), 26 (24), 29-30, 32; Thompson,

Motif-Index of Folk-Literature, G423, a motif occurring very anciently in the Ras

Shamra fragments; Barton, “Second

Liturgical Poem from Ras Shamra,” 38.

^125. See Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk-Literature, E545, 561, 373.

^126. Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 145; cf.

146B; Herodotus, History IX, 110.

^127. Götze, Kleinasien, 153, 155 (of the Hittite king).

^128. Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 153. The symbol of Orestes’ utter banishment from

the world of men is his eating alone at a

table set apart (Euripides, Iphigeneia at

Taurus 949-54).

^129. Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 145; Herman Kees, Ägypten, in Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft, vol. 3, pt. 1, 3a (Munich: Beck, 1933), 64.

^130. Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 151

(Thracian), 153 (Parthian). It is still

considered an ill omen in the East for food

to pass directly from the hand of a giver to

that of a receiver.

^131. Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 13, 16-17, 38, 55, is insistent on this point.

^132. Many were actually killed in scrambles for tesserae (Dio Cassius, LIX, 25, 5; Herodian, Histories V, 6, 10). Yet for Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 4, “Ausstreuen” is nothing more than a convenient means of

distribution.

^133. Gifts were flung until “desunt qui rapiant,

sinusque pleni gaudent” (there are too few to grasp them all, and full laps shout for joy);

Statius, Silvae I, 6, 79-80. When “omne genus rerum missilia sparsit, et . . . pars

maior intra popularia deciderat” (he

scattered gifts of all sorts of things, and the greater part fell among the people), Domitian

gave the knights and senators a special

repeat shower, Suetonius, Domitian IV, 5; cf. Suetonius, Augustus 41, and Duruy,

“Régime municipal dans l’empire romain,”

348. Rich senators complained if they failed

to get their share of these trivial “hand-

outs,” a plain indication of their symbolic

nature (Symmachus, Epistolae IX, 153; cf.

Commodian, Instructiones II, 34).

^134. Quite apart from the fun of the licentia diripiendi (Suetonius, Augustus 98; Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews XIX, 1, 13, 93), there is an archaic background to

the rixae (brawls), as seen in Apollodorus, I, 9, 23; Hyginus, Fabulae 22, where Jason’s sparsio of stones that begets a race of men is followed by yet another which sets them

fighting by the ears. Altheim, Terra Mater, 136, surmises a “kultische Bedeutung”

(cultic meaning) in the rixanti populo

(brawling mob) of Persius, Saturnalia V, 176, but is not more specific. The rixa

figures also in the Greek sparsio;

Aristophanes, Wasps 58-59; cf. Cornford, Origin of Attic Comedy, 100-101.

^135. Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 56, and Friedländer, Sittengeschichte Roms, 2:317, both use the term without following up the

clue.

^136. Hermann Dessau, Geschichte der römischen Kaiserzeit, 2 vols. (Berlin: Weidmann, 1924-26), 1:339.

^137. Alexander Tille, Yule and Christmas: Their Place in the Germanic Year (London: Nutt, 1899), 31-32, 114-15. The famous year-cake of the Slavs (Machal, Slavic

Mythology, 218-19) recalls the round Janus cakes of the Roman New Year (Wissowa,

Religion und Kultus der Römer, 111, n. 3).

Contributions to the Greek feast had to be

caught, not purchased; Athenaeus,

Deipnosophists IV, 141; Pausanias, Description of Greece VII, 18, 7; cf. 1

Samuel 2:13-14, where the priest receives

his share by a sort of grab-bag. A fowl

alighting on the emperor’s table during the

scrambles of the Saturnalia was hailed as the

best of omens; Aelius Lampridius, Severus

Alexander XXXVII, 6; cf. Franz Dölger,

“Die Apollinarischen Spiele und das Fest

Pelusia,” in Antike und Christentum, 1:153; and Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 89, on “die sacrale Grundlage der Jagd” (the

sacral basis of the hunt).

^138. All this is implied in the symbol of the cornucopia, the impartiality motif in the

formula, “O dominum aequum et bonum”

(O just and good lord)! (Suetonius, Augustus 53; cf. Dio Chrysostom, Orations III, 73; Athenaeus, Deipnosophists I, 13; Livy, XXXI, 4, 6-7; Tacitus, Annals IV, 64).

^139. E.g., Aelius Lampridius, Heliogabalus 22; Suetonius, Augustus 75.

^140. V. E. Ehrenberg, “Losung,” in RE 13:1459; A. Bouché-Leclercq, “La Divination

italique,” RHR 1 (1880): 43-44; cf. Cicero, De Divinatione I, 34; II, 85-87. It should not be overlooked that sero, serere also means to “sow.”

^141. Ehrenberg, “Losung,” in RE 13:1455-57; Bouché-Leclercq, “Divination italique,” 44-45. In this capacity Fortuna is an old

autochthonous version of the Mother

Goddess (see above, n. 101).

^142. Ehrenburg, “Losung,” in RE 13:1455-57.

The great shrine of Fortuna Primigenia at

Praeneste was open only at the New Year

(cf. refs. in Bouché-Leclercq, “Divination

italique,” 46-47); so also the Pythian

originally gave oracles only one day a year,

on the god’s birthday (Plutarch, Quaestiones Graecae no. 9).

^143. Bouché-Leclercq, “Divination italique,” 44; Ehrenberg, “Losung,” in RE 13:1475;

Cicero, De Divinatione II, 85-87.

^144. The numerous tesserae from the shrine of Aesculapius and Hygeia on the Tiber Island

fulfil all these conditions; Rostovzeff,

Römische Bleitesserae, 2-3, 99.

^145. Hers is the most common name on all tokens; Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 97; Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der

Römer, 246; and designates the goddess as

“Spenderin von materiellen Gütern”

(distributor of material goods); Rostovzeff,

Römische Bleitesserae, 110.

^146. Seneca, Epistulae I, 74, 6: “ad haec, quae a fortuna sparguntur, sinum expandit et

sollicitus missilia exspectat” (opens his arms for what is scattered by fortune and waits

anxiously for her gifts).

^147. Cf. lexica; Mommsen, “Das romische Gastrecht und die romische Clientel,” 340-41; K. Regling, “Tessera,” in RE 2:5:851-54.

^148. Pausanias, Description of Greece VII, 25, 6; II, 20, 3 (where Tyche corresponds to the

Italian Fortuna).

^149. The classic treatment of this is by Mommsen, “Das romische Gastrecht und

die romische Clientel,” 339-42, and Theodor

Mommsen, “Das romische Gastrecht,” in

Römische Forschungen, 2 vols. (Berlin: Weidmann, 1864), 1:338-43. The need for

such tickets argues their origin in public rather than in the intimate private cult.

^150. Cf. Regling, “Tessera,” in RE 2:5:851-54; Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 1; Marquardt, Römische Staatsverwaltung,

2:128: the incisi (those whose names are inscribed) possess “ein für allemal eine

tessera” (a permanent tessera) to match their names in the list. Cf. Livy, VIII, 20, 8, and Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der

Römer, 131, on the great tessera of the state.

^151. Deimel, Sumerische Grammatik, 73, 77-78

(dated New Year), 86-87, 210, 224.

^152. Throughout the Middle East it was the custom for everyone coming to the king’s

feast at the New Year to contribute an

arrow; Carnoy, Iranian Mythology, 306-8.

These were the baresmen used by the king in divination as he sat “on a golden throne,

on a golden cushion, on a golden carpet . . .

with hands overflowing” (ibid., 299-300), as

appears from comparison with the Tartar

custom described by Joinville, Histoire de

St. Louis (Paris: Foucault, 1824), 475-78.

For the Scythian version cf. Herodotus,

History IV, 81; for the Caucasus, William E.

D. Allen, A History of the Georgian People (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner,

1932), 331. The use of lucky arrows in

determining portions at feasts is frequently

mentioned in Arabic sources, e.g., Qur’an

2:216; Mucallaqat, 2, 104. The same

association of arrow-token (or seal) and

feast is apparent in very early Babylonia,

where seals seem to have originated as

arrows or reeds (William H. Ward, The Seal Cylinders of Western Asia [Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institute, 1910], 5), the

earliest of these being devoted to New

Year’s banquet themes. According to

Frankfort, “Gods and Myths on Sargonid

Seals,” 7, 6, their “designs of good omen,”

which reflect “the Babylonian New Year

festival . . . antedate by 2,000 years the texts upon which we must draw.” The favorite

subjects of the very earliest seals are

banquet and hunting scenes; Leon Legrain,

Archaic Seal Impressions (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1936), 4. The arrow

appears as a device for carrying a message

between this world and the world above in

much folklore, e.g., Herodotus, History V, 105. See “The Arrow, the Hunter, and the

State,” pages 1-32 in this volume.

^153. “Marks were cut on pieces of wood, . . .

and each person had his mark. Sometimes

the places at feasts were assigned by lot; . . .

images of some of the gods were sometimes

marked on the lots”; Paul B. Du Chaillu,

The Viking Age, 2 vols. (New York:

Scribner, 1890), 1:350. Runes and ogam

characters take their form from being cut on

such pieces of wood (John Rhys, Lectures

on the Origin and Growth of Religion as

Illustrated by Celtic Heathendom [London: Williams and Norgate, 1898], 268), just as

Babylonian characters appear on seals “long

before we meet any instance of writing on

clay tablets”; Legrain, Archaic Seal

Impressions, 4. Such marks exactly

resemble the Hausmarken, or private seals,

derived anciently from some southern European alphabet “most like the North-Etruscan,” according to Gustav Neckel, “Die

Runen,” Acta Philologica Scandinavica 12

(1937-38): 114-15; cf. 112-13.

^154. For admission to the primitive Greek feasts the poor would present a section of reed or a

laurel leaf; Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 140, 141E. The leaf would be given back to

the holder with a paste of oil and barley on

it, both laurel (ibid., IV, 140C) and reed

serving as cheap and convenient containers;

Campbell Bonner, “Notes on the Use of the

Reed, with Special Reference to Some

Doubtful Passages,” Transactions and

Proceedings of the American Philological

Society 39 (1908): 35-48. The laurel leaf here has a token value, for one could pay

certain fines either with a cake (kamma) or with a laurel leaf (kammatis); Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 141A. The leaf was put to the same use by the early Romans, who

would cook their New-Year and birthday

cakes on them and call them panes laureati;

Cato, De Agri Cultura 75-76 and 121. In the East the strena takes the alternative form of sections of reed under the Empire;

Malalas, Chronographia, in PG 97:481-84; Chronicon Paschale, in PG 92:641. An unexplained passage from Wilhelm Henzen,

ed., Acta Fratrum Arvalium Quae

Supersunt (Berlin: Reimer, 1874), 26, seems to imply that there was a scramble in the

giving out of the panes laureati: “et panes laureat(os) per public(os) partiti sunt; ibi

omn(es) lumemulia cum rapinis acceperunt”

(they distributed the panes laureati among the crowd; everyone got the lumemulia

there in wild scrambles). Since the meaning

of lumemulia is entirely unknown (ibid., 32), may not the rapinae refer to rixae of the distributions rather than to “beets”?

^155. Wensinck, “Semitic New Year and the Origin of Eschatology,” 172 and passim,

citing especially Ephraim Syrus, Hymn II, 2; VI, 13. The heavenly Book of Life is

matched by like tablets kept in the

underworld; Aeschylus, Eumenides 273-75.

The worst of all penalties is to be blotted out from the Book of Life, to be “cut off from among the people,” and so forth.

^156. Blumenthal, “Ludi Saeculares,” 231-32; cf.

Herodian, Histories III, 8, 10.

^157. The Golden Tablets of the Orphic mysteries as “passports to the other world” (Rohde,

Psyche, 249-50 [vii, 21]) resemble the coins or cakes with which the dead were expected

to pay their admission to the banquets of the

beyond, thus assuring their nonreturn; Paul

Sartori, “Die Totenmünze,” Archiv für

Religionswissenschaft 2 (1899): 210, 213. A dos or sportula had to be presented by all seeking entrance to the feasts of the various

collegia and mysteries; Dölger, “Die Münze im Taufbecken,” in Antike und Christentum

3:9-12; Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der

Römer, 407.

^158. The Phyllobolia was one of the formal steps of initiation into the mysteries; references in Eitrem, Opferritus und Voropfer, 279. In the famous picture of the heavenly banquet of

Vibia, depicting certain mysteries

(Rostovzeff, Mystic Italy, 145-46; cf.

Johannes Leipoldt, Die Religionen der

Umwelt des Urchristentums [Leipzig:

Deichert, 1926], no. 166), two youths are

seen in the foreground on a flowering field;

one of them scatters small objects which the

other gathers up and puts in his mouth;

Raffaele Garruci, Storia dell’arte cristiana nei primi otto secoli della Chiesa, 6 vols.

(Prato: Giachetti, 1880), 6, pl. 494; Henri

Leclerq, “Agape,” in Cabrol and Leclercq,

Dictionnaire d’archéologie chrétienne et de liturgie, 1:839-40, fig. 186. Cf. Aischrion, I, 43, in Poetae Lyrici Graeci, ed. Theodorus Bregk (Leipzig: Teubner, 1882), 2:517: “kai

theōn brōma agrōstin heures, hēn Kronos

katespeiren” (you have found dog’s-tooth

grass, the food of the gods, which Kronos

scattered about); and Carnoy, Iranian

Mythology, 308: “And there shalt thou place the meadow where unceasingly the golden-colored, where unceasingly the invincible

food is eaten.” The feast on the grass with

its miraculous abundance occurs in

Herodotus, History I, 126; Matthew 14:19; and Mark 6:39; and in the archaic Roman

year-feasts; Ovid, Fasti III, 532-40; this Anna Perenna, the year-goddess, is identical

with Ceres; Altheim, Terra Mater, 93; Henzen, Acta Fratrum Arvalium, 26: “in cespite . . . sacr(um) fecer(unt)" (they held the banquet . . . on the grass).

^159. A remarkable parallel is the Indian Aśvamedha feast, at the end of which the

king gave to each priestly guest a piece of

gold of 100 grains, “because the life of man

is 100 years” (Dumont, L’Aśvamedha, iii, 15-16; cf. v; 249). Just so, after the Arval

banquet each of the brethren received a

sportula of gold coin, which is always

specified as 100 denarii (Henzen, Acta

Fratrum Arvalium, 13, 16-17, 26-27, 45-46); though it is not stated that this is for one hundred years, such was in fact the secular

life-span, and the coin was exchanged for

the wish, “augeat t(ibi) I(uppiter) a(nnos)"

(may Jupiter increase your years); ibid., 45-

46; cf. Wissowa, “Arvales Fratres,” in RE

2:1475.

^160. P. Nigidius Figulus, frg. 99; Scholia ad Germanicum (ed. Maas), 85, 154.

^161. Apollodorus III, 4, 1; Euripides, Madness of Heracles 4-7; Hyginus, Fabulae 178; Ovid, Metamorphosis III, 101-30; cf. Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk-Literature, A1245. On Spartoi from speirein, cf. Turk, “Spartoi,”

in RE 2:3:1538-40.

^162. Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer, 261-62.

^163. Marquardt, Römische Staatsverwaltung, 2:130.

^164. The seal was a contract between god and man as it was between men; Otto Weber,

Altorientalische Siegelbilder (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1920), 1, 5. It was “the emblem of

the Creator God, as a symbol and guarantee

of his assistance,” W. M. Flinders Petrie,

Scarabs and Cylinders with Names

(London: University of London, 1917), 3-4;

also “a peculium of their owner,” that had “a

protective virtue . . . [and] may have

conveyed a sense of divine companionship,”

Arthur J. Evans, The Palace of Minos at

Knossos, 4 vols. (London: Macmillan,

1935), 3:144. On the tessera as contract, see above, n. 149.

^165. Such were the song of the Sicilian bukoliasts (Nilsson, Geschichte der griechischen Religion, 1:118), the Eiresione song (ibid., 1:114), and the typical “quête”

song in Aristophanes, The Birds 723-36.

Latin equivalents of these are the laudes

pueriles, a collection of which may be found in Leclerq, “Laudes Pueriles,” in Cabrol and

Leclercq, Dictionnaire d’archéologie

chrétienne et de liturgie, 8:1910-16, and the panegyrics, collected in Henri Leclerq,

“Panégyrique,” in ibid., 13:1016-45. The

activities of these youthful New Year’s

choruses closely resemble those of the Arval

and Salian brethren; cf. Robert S. Conway,

Ancient Italy and Modern Religion

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

1933), 2-10. When a sparsio is given at a private party, the guests spring to their feet

and recite an acclamatio to the Emperor; Petronius, Satyricon 60.

^166. This appears in a very ancient form of marriage contract, wherein one party catches

the gold or silver thrown by the other;

Poetae Lyrici Graeci 2:299 (epigrams 2-3), also in Elegy and Iambus with the

Anacreontea, 2 vols. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1968), 2:6-7 (epigrams 7-8); Herodotus, History I, 199; Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk-Literature, H316, where both throwing and catching serve to

establish a contract. If the gifts thrown into the abyss at the New Year disappeared, it

was believed that the god had accepted the

contract; if not, it was taken as a bad sign;

Pausanias, Description of Greece III, 23, 9.

^167. Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 41.

Many of these acclamations are collected by

Ferrarius in Graevius, Thesaurus

Antiquitatem Romanorum, 6:104-15, 123-36, 150-83, 199-230; and Leclerq, “Laudes

Pueriles,” in Cabrol and Leclerq,

Dictionnaire d’archéologie chrétienne et de

liturgie, 8:1910-16. The hundreds of acclamationes almost without exception (1) hail the donor as worthy and victorious, and

(2) wish him multos annos (many years).

^168. The principle of substitution is here in full force. The common resemblance of tesserae

to coins is explained by the substitution of

coins and dice alike for those primitive

astragals of which Neolithic Italy has yielded a great harvest, but which disappear

completely in historic times to survive in

altered form both as coins and as dice;

Ehrenberg, “Losung,” in RE 13:1485; Hugo Blümner, Die römischen Privataltertümer

(Munich: Beck, 1911), 412, n. 12. The

Lydians, who are traditionally said to have

invented money, also invented lots and

games of chance, and that in an attempt to

solve the food-distribution problem;

Herodotus, History I, 94. Since writing possibly began with seals, it is significant

that Cadmus, who begot the race by sowing

tokens, is also credited with the invention of written symbols. Diogenes recommended

the universal use of dice as money; Athenaeus, Deipnosophists IV, 159; and indeed gilt astragals marked like dice still

serve as money in the most civilized parts of

the East Indies. Blümner, Römischen

Privataltertümer, 415, finds that the Romans never diced except for money, so

that the coin was part of the game. While

coins may have originated from seals

(Arthur R. Burns, Money and Monetary

Policy in Early Times [New York: Kelley, 1927], 37), dice and seals are also confused

and identified in archaic times; Fritz

Hommel, Ethnologie und Geographie des

alten Orients (Munich: Beck, 1926), 48-49

(Hittite), 66 (Etruscan).

^169. A large class of bronze and the whole class of bone tesserae are tesserae lusoriae; Regling, “Tessera,” in RE 2:5:851-54.

^170. Regling, “Spintria,” in RE 2:3:1814, and Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 56-57.

^171. Horace, Carmen Saeculare I, 4, 14; II, 7, 25-26; Mau, “Astragalos,” in RE 2:1795, suggests that this is the reason for calling

Venus basilikos; cf. Plautus, Curculio 357.

^172. Tacitus, Annals XIII, 15; Cicero, Epistulae ad Atticum V, 20, 5; Lucian, Saturnalia 2-4, and 9; Seneca, Apocolocyntosis 8. The

Roman emperor learned the fortune of his

rule by dicing at the New Year in the shrine

of Fortuna at Praeneste (Suetonius,

Domitian 15) exactly as the Babylonian monarch would dice in the Chamber of

Destiny, or the kings of the North would

cast dice in the temple of Uppsala to win

300 years of life; Paul Herrmann, Nordische Mythologie (Leipzig: Engelmann, 1903), 531. King, high-priest (Cicero, In Verrem II, 2, 126), and scapegoat (Leviticus 16:8;

Babylonian Talmud Yoma 63b; Helmold,

Chronicle of the Slavs I, 52, and so forth) were all chosen by lot.

^173. Martial, Epigrams V, 84; XI, 6; cf.

Suetonius, Augustus 71.

^174. E.g., Rostovzeff, Römische Bleitesserae, 59; Regling, “Spintria,” in RE 2:3:1814. Far from being a late invention, just such

“obscöne Bleispiegel und Bleiplaketten”

(obscene lead mirrors and lead plaques) were found in the temple of Ishtar at Assur

(Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien,

2:438), and refer no doubt to that system of

ritual prostitution for which Herodotus,

History I, 196, actually finds parallels in Italy; cf. Joshua Whatmough, The

Foundations of Roman Italy (London:

Methuen, 1937), 173.

^175. Best known in its Celtic versions; cf. Henry d’Arbois de Jubainville, The Irish

Mythological Cycle and Celtic Mythology,

tr. Richard I. Best (Dublin: Hodges, Figgis,

1903), 178-82. A very old version of the

story is the Setna legend, dating at least from the Twelfth Dynasty in Egypt, Max Pieper,

Agyptische Literatur (Potsdam: Athenaion, 1927), 93-94; Gaston Maspero, Les contes

populaires de l’Égypte ancienne, 3d ed.

(Paris: Guilmoto, 1906), 100-101. Pieper

identifies it with the Rhampsinitus cycle;

Herodotus, History I, 121-26, with its remarkable dicing episode, ibid., I, 122, and

its tesserae lasciviae, ibid., I, 126.

^176. Macrobius, Saturnalia I, 10, 12-14; Tertullian, Ad Nationes II, 10; Augustine, De Civitate Dei (The City of God) VI, 7, 2, in PL 41:184-85; Plutarch, Quaestiones Romanae no. 35; Plutarch, Romulus 4-5.

Acca divided up all her property among the

Roman people, as did her mate at the Ara

Maxima, and they celebrated her bounty in a midwinter feast at her tomb; Gellius, Attic Nights VII, 7, 7, citing Cato; cf. Macrobius, Saturnalia I, 10, 16; Varro, De Lingua Latina VI, 23-24; Plutarch, Romulus 4-5; Plutarch, Quaestiones Romanae no. 34.

From Herodotus, History II, 121-22, it is plain that the lady of the Setna cycle, whom

Herodotus calls Demeter, is none other than

Acca’s indigitamentum, Ceres.

^177. Aristophanes, Ecclesiazusae 687-88, 834-37. Tyche, like Fortuna, was a dicing

goddess, and as such, like Acca, the

companion of Hercules; Pausanias,

Description of Greece II, 20, 3.

The Unsolved Loyalty

Problem: Our Western

Heritage

A serious defect in recent discussions of

the problem of loyalty has been the lack of

any sound historical treatment of the

subject.1 Much that is contained in the records of antiquity reveals a conscious

concern of early governments with the

problem of loyalty. Royal inscriptions and

letters, abundant ritual texts, and the fervors of prophets and poets in every age of crisis

betray a desire to incite feelings not of fear and submission alone but of genuine loyalty

in the hearts of subjects and citizens, and

might well be studied as propaganda

literature. But for the fullest and most illuminating commentary on regimented

loyalty one must turn to the rich and

revealing records of the Roman world in the

fatal years between the victory of

Constantine and the sack of Rome by the

Vandals in A.D. 450. It is no accident that

scholars since World War II have gravitated

with unerring instinct and unprecedented zeal

to those documents that depict with unrivaled

clarity the starts, alarums, and desperate

devices of a world empire in disintegration,

striving before all things to inspire that

general loyalty which alone could arrest “the

internal decay of the second half of the fourth century [which] had become as bad as a

cancerous growth.” 2

The purpose of this paper is to consider

three significant aspects of the Roman

loyalty program in the period designated.

These are (1) the attempt to excite loyalty by

appealing to the traditions of Western civilization while emphasizing a worldwide

culture-polarization, (2) the attempt to solve the problem of divided loyalty by lumping

all good things together in a “one-package

loyalty,” and (3) the attempt of certain large and important interest groups to use the new

loyalty as a club against old opponents,

thereby effectively wrecking the whole

program. In the course of the discussion it

will become clear that we are dealing not

merely with the desire of the Imperial

government for loyal subjects but with

concrete projects for the implementation of

that desire. The present study is essentially a report on the effectiveness of those projects, resembling as they do certain controversial

procedures of the present time.

Polarized Loyalties

In the fourth century A.D., Western

civilization was threatened with the greatest crisis—internal and external—in its history. 3

When cities (including the capital itself)

were as likely to be taken by the operation of traitors and fifth-columnists as by enemy

assault, when the fate of the world depended

on the loyalty of some Gothic or Hunnish

general to an emperor who did not know his

own mind, when the armies of many nations

could be hurled against each other or united

in brotherhood by the force of a single order, when powerful pressure-groups and colorful

individuals were bidding against each other

for the support of mankind, when the life of

prefect or governor could depend on the

whim of a military or city mob—at such a

time the survival of civilization depended on

the possibility of inducing the world at large to declare its allegiance to some specific

thing and of holding it to that allegiance with firm and sacred bonds. To the Roman mind,

fides, a sense of personal reciprocal obligation, was the key to peace and security

in life—the very essence of the social

order. 4 The same concept of loyalty imbues almost every page of Greek tragedy,

investing it with a profoundly intimate and

domestic atmosphere, which distinguishes

the “Western” mind from the aloof ritualism

of the gorgeous East. But by the fourth

century long years of civil war and world

crisis had widely uprooted the old domestic

loyalties of Greek drama and Roman legend,

and turned the oecumene into a world of displaced persons, inevitably drawn towards

the Big City. 5 To take the place of the old lost loyalty—the prisca fides—a new super-loyalty was needed to guarantee the

permanence of the social order: men were

taught to declare allegiance to a super-thing, a noble abstraction loosely designated as

Romania or Romanitàs.

A host of studies has come forth in recent years, showing the concept of

Romanitàs to be something very close

indeed to that “Western Civilization” by

which one conjures in our own day. 6 At the end of the fourth century, Prudentius repeated what Aelius Aristides had proclaimed at the

end of the second: Rome is more than a

political or geographical entity, the mixed

blood of all the nations; its culture is Culture itself, the extent of its rule is the orbis terrarum, the oecumene, its mission the realization of the Stoic doctrine “that nature intended that all men should as rational

beings form a single community under the

guidance of divine reason.” 7 The certainty with which public opinion glorified the

empire as a world community is astonishing,

says Vogt. 8 Nor was this apparent love for a lofty abstraction a cold and impersonal sort

of thing: devout Christian writers display as

warm and vital an attachment to their Roman heritage as the church itself in the fourth

century. 9

This was the positive appeal to loyalty.

But men’s passions are more quickly and

keenly stirred by opposition than by

approbation, and the inevitable corollary to

the doctrine of Romania was that of

Barbaria. “Everything that existed outside of this unified world was viewed by the

general public as desolation and

barbarism.” 10 This again was an abstract and artificial thing—it was the old doctrine of

the Two Worlds that has been discussed in

this journal before, but, for all its

hollowness, a highly effective force in

history. 11 Externus timor, maximum concordiae vinculum was an old Roman

maxim—the secret of unity is to find an

external foe. Since Republican times, Parthia

had been “the type and representative of the

untamed Orient,” the Eastern peril, the symbol of Asiatic barbarism; but when the

Parthians were absorbed by the revived and

highly centralized Persian Empire, or during

the years when Barbaria was united under a superman such as Attila, conditions were

present for a true world polarization, with

the East replying in kind to Western charges

of barbarism and aggression. 12 The situation may be illustrated by the story of Priscus on

the steppes.

In A.D. 448 a Roman ambassador who

had just arrived at the court of Attila, rex omnium regum, on the plains between

Europe and Asia, came upon a well-dressed

Scythian who, to his surprise, spoke Greek.

He learned from the man that he had been a

successful merchant in Moesia, but when his

city fell, to save his business, he had joined up with the conquering hosts and soon found

in the Scythian community a far better way of

life than he had ever known as a Roman.

[He said that] once the war was over,

anyone could live among the Scythians

in complete independence, being free to

manage his personal affairs exactly as

he chose with virtually no interference

from anybody. On the other hand,

anyone living the Roman way of life

stood a very good chance of getting

killed in case of war, being forced to

rely for his survival on the operations of

others, since the mean suspicion of the

government forbade anyone to bear

arms in his own defense. Furthermore,

those entrusted with the business of

defense were rendered ineffectual by

incompetent and cowardly commanders.

And the burdens of peace were actually

harder to bear than those of war—the

intolerable load of taxation and tribute,

the insults and injuries of rascally officials, the unequal application of the

laws, by which an offender if he was

rich enough got off scot-free, but if he

was poor felt the full weight and

majesty of the law for even the slightest

unintentional slip; and if he lived long

enough to see his case through the

courts, would find himself utterly ruined

by long, drawn-out, and expensive legal

proceedings. The most disgusting thing

about the whole business, he said, was

that law and justice were strictly for

sale.

“When he had run on this way at great

length,” says Priscus, “I finally asked him

politely if he would consent to listen to my

side of the story for a while.” Then Priscus

proceeded to point out that in theory there

never was a better system than the Roman, in

which each bore his proper burden, whether on the farm, in the army, or in government

service. Priscus continues:

We are all bound to obey the laws, and

that goes even for the Emperor himself;

which is just the opposite of what you

say, that the rich can gouge the poor

with impunity—unless someone escapes

justice by hiding. But in general you

will find that what applies to the rich

also applies to the poor. . . . That is the

rule not only among the Romans but

everywhere in the civilized world:

every man thanks his private fortune for

whatever befalls him as a free man, and

is not dependent for it on the will of this

or that military despot.

The Romans, he says, treat their house-

slaves better than the barbarians do their

subjects, “and they certainly do not have the

power of life and death over them as your Scythian masters do. By and large, it is a

free way of life.”

At this point, Priscus avers, his new

friend shed tears and confessed that the laws

were indeed fair and the Roman government

a good one, “but that the men who

administered it had lost the good old Roman

spirit, and had corrupted it.” To this the

Roman has no answer, and the conversation

is conveniently interrupted. 13

Gibbon saw in this debate only an

effective statement of the case against Rome,

to which the “prolix and feeble declamation”

of the ambassador was no reply at all.14 Yet Priscus plainly thinks he has won the

argument, and the modern reader, made wise

by new experience, knows that this is one of

those ideological discussions in which

neither side is ever beaten. For all his fine

Ciceronian after-thoughts, Priscus does not

invent the issue, for Agathias some years later describes a general migration of

“Christian philosophers” to the court of the

Persian king, which at a distance looked to

them like a true Utopia,15 and Procopius tells how the poorer classes, “the mechanics and

handworkers, were naturally compelled to

struggle with hunger, and many in

consequence changed their citizenship and

went off as fugitives to the land of Persia.” 16

Salvian, a contemporary of Priscus, reports

from far western Gaul that “people are

everywhere going over to the Goths, the

Bagaudi or any other ruling tribe of

barbarians. . . . For they prefer to live as free men sub specie captivitatis rather than to go on living as captives sub specie libertatis.”

Worst of all, says Salvian, those who have

been the most loyal, deserving, and patriotic

Romans are the very ones who are now

“moved to declare that they wish they were

not Romans!” 17 Here again it is the clash between the Two Worlds, each describing

itself as the free world and its rival as a

slave-state. But if the freedom of the West is for Salvian only “so-called freedom,” the

case is no better with the vaunted barbarian

freedom: the very purpose of Priscus’s

mission was to discuss the return to Attila of numerous of his subjects who had fled to the

Empire seeking refuge from barbarian

“freedom.” 18

On both sides the ancient propaganda of

freedom has a singularly hollow ring. Within

the overall polarization of East and West,

each of those conflicting spheres was in

itself a world of factions and parties, of rival ideologies and rival cultures pitted against

each other in deadly conflict, yet so exactly

alike in everything but label (and usually the rivals were contending for the possession of

some world-commanding label) as to give

the impression that one antagonist is simply a mirror-image of the other. A visitor to the

field headquarters of any faction during the

civil wars that opened the fourth century

would have been at a loss to discover from

his surroundings whether he was in a

Christian or pagan, Roman or barbarian

camp:19 in either case he would find the chief at prayer in his tent, long-robed priests chanting and burning tapers or busily

practicing the arts of divination;20 and if he came at the right time such a visitor might

even discover the nature of those signs in the heavens that each commander devoutly

claimed as a special manifestation of

Providence to himself and his followers.21 If our visitor toured about among the cities, he

might marvel, as did Agathias, that the

course of civil life was virtually the same in the Persian and the Roman Empires, 22 and if he attended the synods of the church which

made the age illustrious, he would have some difficulty to discern which side was

which; for, as Hilary observed, that group

which with fierce devotion supported a

doctrine at one session might within the

month be found espousing the very opposite

doctrine with equal fervor. 23 If he went to the games and shows that consumed almost the

whole time and energy of the urban masses,

the visitor would be required, as if his life

depended on it, to take his stand with one

noisy faction or another, with nothing in the

world to enable him to distinguish between

them save the colors they wore.24 Finally the bemused wanderer, if he went to court on a

crown-day and stood in the presence of

God’s representative on earth, would surely

have to ask a bystander whether it was the

true ruler of the world he beheld or his

depraved counterpart—for the court ritual of

the two empires was identical,25 and it was

the custom of the emperors of Rome and Asia to describe themselves in identical

terms, while each accused his rival of being

nothing but a base forgery and depraved

imitation of himself.26

This all-pervading identity of

institutions shows that we have here not a

real clash of ideologies at all but only the

rivalry of parties animated by identical

principles and racing for the same

objective. 27 Yet loyalty to the West was no glib and superficial thing but a deeply

ingrained cultural heritage. The concept of

civilization as liberalitas, the free way of life, and of civilized man as one engaged in

liberal thought and speaking the common

language of all free, civilized men, as

opposed to the barbarian who was

necessarily inferior and necessarily a slave,

was deeply felt and clearly formulated in

late antiquity. 28 It had far deeper roots, in

fact, than the copy-desk cliches of our own day, for the permanent proximity of

unassimilated barbarians made the idea of

the Two Worlds an intimate reality. The age-

long struggle to repel, check, or annihilate

the perennial enemy from the steppes was

once popularly described as “the eternal

question,” “the strife between Europe and

Asia, between east and west, between Aryan

and non-Aryan.” 29 But this is only the Western version of the conflict which all the

great peripheral civilizations, from China to

Britain, have had to wage with the

“Heartland,” whose hordes have been dealt

with for thousands of years in the same

established ways: by subtle and disruptive

diplomacy, by the long and costly limes

(borders), by punitive and deterrent

expeditions, and, when all else has failed, by the reluctant absorption of their barbarian

conquerors.

The marvelous victories that thwarted the great Persian attacks on Greece in the

fifth century B.C. had been to the men who

won those victories a plain manifestation of

divine power, a sobering and chastening

experience that placed all human pretense,

Greek and barbarian alike, in its proper and

humiliating perspective. But the men of a

later age and another mold, viewing those

successes in retrospect, preferred a more

flattering interpretation of events: Marathon

and Salamis were held up to posterity as a

brilliant demonstration of the natural

superiority of Western man over

barbarians.30 Whereas Aeschylus and Herodotus have no found illusions about

Greek virtue and Asiatic baseness, the

educators of succeeding ages fed upon such

pleasing stuff and made it the mortar of a

common sentiment which, to quote Eduard

Meyer, “bound the civilized world together

from the Rhone to Cyprus, from the Dnieper to the Crimea and Cyrene.” 31

Thus Western Civilization was nursed in

the schools on a legend of Western

Goodness: Hic est Ausonia, the Western World of clean, fresh, simple, unspoiled

pioneers. This fiction became the very

cornerstone of the official Vergilian doctrine of Romanitàs—Rome was great because

Rome was good.32 The emperors who after the second century took the names of Pius

and Felix were giving expression “to the old

Roman belief in the close association

between piety and good fortune, ”33 while indulging in the ingrained Roman vice,

blatantly paraded throughout the whole of

Latin literature, of dwelling with a kind of

morbid fascination on one’s own simple

goodness. School boys have been told for

centuries that the Romans were a simple,

severe, and virtuous folk, with a near

monopoly on pietas and fides, because, forsooth, the Romans themselves always

said so, though almost every page of the

record contradicts the claim. 34 What better demonstration for the effectiveness of the

official propaganda? Teachers and orators

drilled the essentials of Western goodness

into their pupils and auditors until, by the

fourth century, when hardly a speck of

ancient virtue remained, men could talk of

nothing but that virtue. 35 They go right on sinning, Salvian reports, in the sublime

conviction that no matter how vilely they

may act, or how nobly the barbarians

behave, God must necessarily bless them and

curse the barbarians for being what they are.

Yet Salvian himself shows how well the

lesson has been taught when he stoutly

affirms that, after all, no barbarian can be really virtuous! 36

To the lessons of the schools, carefully

supervised by the government,37 was added a more aggressive policy of deliberately

widening the gulf between the Two Worlds.

For centuries, barbarian and Roman, East

and West, had been mingling on terms of

greatest intimacy, producing a borderline

culture in which it was quite impossible to

draw the line between one culture and the

other.38 Priscus mentions quite casually the presence of people from the West, visiting

relatives in the camps of the Asiatics; he

notes the busy coming and going of

merchants between the Two Worlds and

describes the kind hospitality shown him, a

complete stranger, in the homes of the

Easterners. But with this he gives us the

other side of the picture—the official side:

the ubiquitous activity of spies and agents in Roman pay, the infusion into the very court

of Attila of large sums of Roman money to

corrupt and divide, the insane and mounting

conviction of each of the rulers of the two halves of the world ( both barbarians!) that his was the divine calling to liberate the

human race from the intolerable ambition of

the other.39 The official attitude to the barbarians was set forth a few years after

this in Synesius’s instructions to the feeble

Emperor Arcadius. According to the good

bishop, every Roman household has its

Scythian slave, every petty artisan and

craftsman his Scythian helper, and every

Roman street is alive with Scythian porters

and runners, “as if these people thought

service in Rome was the only thing.” 40 As to the moral qualities of these foreigners,

Synesius must admit that they surpass the

Romans in energy, honesty, reliability, and

perseverance. 41 Yet for all that they are still barbarians, and as liable to murder citizens

in their beds as were ever any of their

savage ancestors. “Your father made allies

of these Scythians,” he tells the young and idiotic emperor: “He should have known that

there is no virtue in a barbarian. From that day to this they have simply laughed at us.”

Lacking the heroic qualities of their fathers,

“they are slaves, for they are people without

a land of their own. Hence the proverb, ‘the

empty waste of the Scythians,’ for they are

always running away from settled life. ”42

Plainly Synesius thinks that the primordial

ways of the nomads are some new sign of

degeneracy. So far was one of the most

learned men of his day, an expert advisor on

foreign affairs, from comprehending the

Asiatic way of life which was impinging

upon the Roman world at a thousand

points. 43

For their part, the barbarians, at first

enormously impressed by the Empire, 44

became resentful of the snubbing they

received and then, through long familiarity,

openly and increasingly contemptuous. “We see the barbarians living intermingled with

us in our armies, our cities, and our

provinces,” says Sulpicius Severus, “yet

refusing to accept our culture as their

own.” 45 In the fifth century, it was impossible, especially in the Western

regions, to distinguish between Romani and Barbari, since they had become completely intermingled; in which state of things, he

says, it was the barbarians who insisted on

widening the breech, glorying in the name of

“barbarian” as the only fit title for free

men. 46

There is no need to trace the endless

course of this futile and paralyzing game;

Nancy Lenkeith has shown how it persisted

right into the Middle Ages, when even Pope

Gregory would not come to an understanding

with the Lombards “chiefly because the

pontiff had a feeling of revulsion for the

barbarians. . . . The Romans . . . despised Lombard laws, disliked their costumes,

customs, and smell.” 47 The crippling effect of the doctrine of the Two Worlds is

nowhere more clearly demonstrated than in

the pathetic doctrine of the Super-Weapon:

God has given the civilized world a super-

weapon, that all may know where security

and right reside. This wishful assurance is

another invention of the fourth century, as we gather from the teachings of a later emperor

to his son:

This fire [ Greek-fire] was revealed and taught to the great First Emperor of

Christians, Constantine (as we are fully

assured by ancient fathers and divines)

by an angel from heaven, who gave him

emphatic instructions to the effect that

this weapon is only to be manufactured

among Christians—nowhere else—and

only in that city where they have their capital, and absolutely nowhere else.

Under no circumstances is any sample

of the substance or the formula for it to

be transmitted to any other nation. It was

for the purpose of keeping this secret

under his successors that the same

Constantine had placed upon the high

altar of the Great Church itself an

inscription to the effect that anyone who

dares to give a sample of said fire to

any other nation forfeits thereby the

name of Christian and the right to hold

any government office, that such an one

should be stripped of any office he

holds, be declared anathema forever

and ever, and be made a public example

—even though he be the Emperor or the

Patriarch himself, or any other high

official . . . any attempt to break this

rule must incur the penalty. And he calls

upon all who have the cause and fear of God at heart to treat anyone acting in a

contrary way as a Public Enemy and a

traitor to this supreme order, and to

consign him to the most humiliating and

painful death possible. It actually

happened once (for there are always

criminal types) that one of our generals

accepted a huge bribe from a number of

foreign (gentile) powers to provide

them with a sample of this fire; but God,

who would not suffer such a crime to be

perpetrated . . . smote the offender with

fire from heaven . . . and from that day

no one, whether Emperor, prince,

commoner, army officer or any other

mortal, has ever dared to think of such

an act, let alone making any attempt to

perpetrate it (cf. fig. 16).48

Figure 16. Byzantine sailors squirt

Greek fire from bronze syringes in a

manuscript illustration of the tenth

century.

In this little lesson on loyalty, God,

Christianity, civilization, the empire, the

Imperial City, the government, and the

ministration of angels are all on the side of

the super-weapon, while those to whom the

fire is denied are all lumped together as

gentiles, foreigners, heathen, traitors, public enemies, criminals, and damned. Nor does it

seem to occur to the devout monarch that if

God’s own fires are at the immediate disposal of Western civilization, there is

little need for putting such desperate trust in the virtues of naphthalene and military

security, or that an appeal to loyalty cannot well be accompanied by hysterical threats

that only argue a lack of good faith in the one who is appealing. 49 Certainly the super-weapon produced a serious weakening of

military fiber in the West, and, once in the

hands of the Arabs and Turks, was death to

Western fleets and cities. 50

One-Package Loyalty

The hardest political problem with

which the Greeks and Romans had to

struggle was that of conflicting loyalties. The holy court of the Areopagus proved the

problem insoluble when they deadlocked at

the trial of Orestes, and the letters of Cicero

set forth in detail the tragic dilemma of the Roman with his immense capacity and

hunger for loyalty having to change sides

with cynical dexterity in order to survive in

the wars of class and faction. 51 The fourth century was one of those times in Roman

history when the tension of divided loyalties

had become so intolerable that the world

was ready for any settlement that would

guarantee a measure of peace, unity, and

security. 52 The exhausted age accepted the same emergency solution that had given

Rome the kingship, the consuls, and the

principate. The aureum aevum (Golden Age) of Constantine that put an end to the long

reign of civil discord, as that of Augustus

had done three centuries before, was

formally launched with all the solemn rites

and theatrical properties familiar to the

Romans since the days of the fabled kings. 53

The purpose of the gorgeous displays of

Diocletian and Constantine, pagan and Christian, as of all royal ritual, was to

produce in the beholders a religious

experience which would command loyalty—

of that the poets and orators give us clear

assurance.54 The great scaffoldings, acres of painted canvas, firmaments of tapers and

torches, fabulous displays of jewels and

lavish applications of gilt paint left no one in doubt that the glory of the Lord was round

about. 55 Heaven in Our Time was not something to be worked for but something to

be accepted; not a hope, but a fulfillment, a

stupendous miracle, nay, the Christian

Emperor was hailed at his coronation as

“dominus noster . . . praesens et corporalis

deus” (Our Lord . . . God in the flesh among

us),56 and Christian and pagan orators vied in proclaiming the long-awaited blessed age

of the prophets and the Sibyl. 57 Like a man distracted by the claims of a hundred

creditors, who turns all his bills over to a lending agency in exchange for one simple,

ruinous obligation, so the men of the fourth

century lumped all their conflicting loyalties together in one single, unlimited obligation

to the emperor and Romanitàs. All good things became one vague and luminous

whole; whatever could command loyalty

was “in the composition of a specious

argument . . . artfully confounded in one

splendid and brittle mass. ”58

Caecilius in the Octavius had charged

the Christians not with contempt of any

particular doctrine or practice of the ancients but with failing to be duly impressed by the

whole magnificent agglomeration of antique

civilization as a fit object of veneration and awe. 59 To this noble composite the church in the fourth century, as if to atone for her long hesitation and former aspersions, declared

passionate allegiance, sustaining the

traditional heathen dogma, that Roma aeterna was immortal and impregnable, long after the canny pagans themselves had given

it up! 60 Henceforward to be a Christian and to be a Roman were one and the same thing:

“ubique patria, ubique lex et religio mea,”

cries Orosius, ". . . quia ad Christianos et Romanos, Romanus et Christianus accedo”

(my country is everywhere, everywhere my

law and religion . . . because I associate

with Christians and Romans as a Roman and

a Christian). 61 When Christian writers can tell us that the distance between Roman and

barbarian is as great as that between

quadrupeds and bipeds, 62 or that the laws of barbarian nations “bear the same relation to

genuine law—Roman law—as a parrot’s

squawk to human speech,” 63 we have come a long way from the charity of the early

Christian writers, who loved, like certain

earlier Greek philosophers, to mock the vain

and artificial distinction between “Jew and Greek, bond and free” (Galatians 3:28). 64

But now the church was wholly committed—

dangerously committed—to the program of

the Empire: Prudentius boldly throws the

challenge to the pagan world, that victory of

Christian Rome over the barbarians will be

sure proof of the truth of the Christian

religion—one can imagine the reaction in

both camps when Rome was thoroughly

beaten!65

The complete identity of the interests of

the church with those of the Empire in the

fourth century was a revolutionary transfer of loyalty. “The imperial cult remains,” writes

Alföldi, “only such forms as offend Christian

sentiments are a little veiled.” 66 The Church Fathers, diligently reconstructing history in

retrospect, made it appear that the church

and Rome had always been one.67 Eusebius, taking the lead, announces that Christianity

and the Pax Romana “burst upon the world together as if germinated from a single seed:

the twin blessing of the universe. . . . In the same moment all error and superstition were

overcome and an end put to all war and

hostility among the members of the human

race. One Empire was set up over all the

earth and all men became brothers, having

one Father—God, and one Mother—true

piety. ”68 In defense of this new one-package loyalty, philosophy and theology, riding high

on the fashionable tide of Neoplatonism,

were Aaron and Hur upholding the

emperor’s hands: “God is One,” says

Lactantius, “therefore there cannot be more

than one ruler in this world: there are not

many masters in one house, not many pilots

in one ship, not many leaders in one flock or

herd, not many kings in one hive, nor either

can there be many suns in the sky, nor many

souls in one body.” 69 These are the very

terms in which the Khans of Asia have been wont to teach mankind the divinity of their

single rule—the West of the fourth century

and after speaks with a strong Asiatic

accent. 70

Just as all obedient subjects are

embraced in a single shining community, so

all outsiders are necessarily members of a

single conspiracy of evil, a pestilential

congregation of vapors of such uniform

defilement that none can be ever so slightly

tinged with its complexion without being

wholly involved in its corruption. 71 A favorite passage with the churchmen of the

period was that which declared that to err in

the slightest point of the law is to break the whole law. To accept the homoiousios (of similar substance) in place of the

homoousios (consubstantial) is for the enlightened Hilary not just a mistake; it is the commission of every possible crime, the

consummation of all that is depraved; it hands the whole world over to the Devil. 72

By attending a discussion of the homoiousios the emperor has anathematized the holy men

of Nicaea; thereby he has cursed all who

have ever approved of those men; thereby he

has damned his own father and set himself up

as the foe of divine religion, the enemy of the saints, and a rebel against all sacred filial

obligation. Nay, he is worse than a Decius or a Nero, for they fought only Christ the Son,

while he fights both the Father and the Son!

Again, the emperor who tolerates heretical

groups is not just a dupe and a fool, he is a

monster of iniquity, guilty of adultery, theft, and murder—and that not in a mere, crass

physical sense, mind you, but in a spiritual sense, which is infinitely worse. 73 If the emperor in question refuses to make a martyr

of the churchman who flings the coarsest

insults in his face, that does not soften his

guilt but only deepens it—he is only being kind to be cruel, because he knows that such

kindness will put his priestly assailants at a disadvantage. 74 Yet from the festering depths of unspeakable depravity there is one thing

that can save the debauched and unnatural

animal—by a single act, in fact, he can

redeem himself and become the holiest thing

on earth, an emperor under God. And what is

the miraculous prescription? It is very

simple: “Fac transitum ad nos” (Come over

to us)!75 All virtue is comprised in the fact of membership in Our Group; all vice consists

in not belonging. 76

It can be shown by a most convenient

syllogism that since God is on our side we

cannot show any degree of toleration for any

opposition without incurring infinite guilt.77

In the fourth century everybody was

officiously rushing to the defense of God;78

but John Chrysostom’s pious declaration that we must avenge insults to God while

patiently bearing insults to ourselves is put

in its proper rhetorical light by the

assumption of Hilary that an insult to himself is an insult to God.79 Therein lies the great usefulness of the doctrine of guilt and

innocence by association that became so

popular in the fourth century: one does not

need to quibble; there is no such thing as

being partly wrong or merely mistaken; the

painful virtue of forbearance and the labor of investigation no longer embarrass the

champions of one-package loyalty. No matter

how nobly and austerely heretics may live,

for Augustine they are still Antichrist—all of them, equally and indiscriminately; 80 their virtues are really vices, their virginity

carnality, their reason unreason, their

patience in persecution mere insolence; any

cruelty shown them is not really cruelty but

kindness. 81 Chrysostom goes even further: the most grossly immoral atheist is actually

better off than an upright believer who slips

up on one point, since though both go to hell, the atheist has at least the satisfaction of

having gratified his lust on earth. Why not? Is not heresy in any degree a crime against

God? And is not any crime against God an

infinite sin? 82

The insidious thing about such immoral

conclusions is that they are quite logical. The cruelty of the times, says Alföldi, “cannot

fully be explained by the corruption of the

age; . . . the spirit of the fourth century has its part to play. The victory of abstract ways of

thinking, the universal triumph of theory,

knows no half-measures; punishment, like

everything else, must be a hundred per cent,

but even this seems inadequate.” 83

Compromise is now out of the question:

God, who once let his sun shine upon the just

and the unjust, and let the wheat and tares grow together, now insists that the unjust

should cease to exist, that only wheat should

grow in the earth, and that only sheep should

inhabit it. 84 In all seriousness the Emperor Justinian announced to the churchmen his

intention of forcing the devil himself to join the true church and thus achieving in the

world that perfect unity “which Pythagoras

and Plato taught. ”85

Slanted Loyalty

We have considered the first two steps

in the development of loyalty propaganda in

the fourth century, namely, the establishment

of Romanitàs as an object deserving the loyalty of all civilized men and the

identification of Christian with Roman

loyalty. The third and inevitable step was the employment of this magnificent imperative

by various interest groups as a partisan weapon. The partisan groups we shall

consider were the churchmen, the

landowners, and the professors. The story of

how the military went their own way and

followed their own code of loyalty,

cooperating only with governments and

individuals who were willing and able to

“make a deal,” and of how their slanted

loyalty brought them and the Empire to a

common ruin, has been told often and well

since the days of Gibbon. We need not repeat

it here.

We have just noted the use of absolutes

in clerical polemic. The results were what

might have been expected, but the ferocity of

party conflict within the church as described

by the writers of the fourth and fifth centuries exceeds the wildest imaginings. Even those

men, St. Basil reports, who had fought the

uphill fight for decency and striven

conscientiously through the years to be just and fair with others, in the end found

themselves forced to surrender and become

just like the rest, who were all engaged in a

frantic game of testing each others’ loyalty.86

The result, he says, is that the church is

entirely leaderless, everyone wants to give

orders, but no one will take them; the self-

appointed have grabbed what they could and

broken up the church in a spirit of such

savage, unbridled hatred and universal

mistrust that the only remaining principle of

unity anywhere is a common desire to do

harm: men will cooperate only where

cooperation is the most effective means of

doing injury to others. 87 It was characteristic of the Age of Constantine, says Burckhardt,

“that a man could be intensely devout and at

the same time grossly immoral.” There was

nothing contradictory in that—men had

simply discarded personal integrity for a

much easier group loyalty. 88 “Who can swim against the tide of custom?” cries Augustine,

who recalls how lightly he surrendered his

own conscience to the keeping of the gang.

The emperor’s formula for establishing

perfect unity and loyalty in the church and the empire was that plan which the clergy

themselves constantly urged upon him and

his successors, importunately demanding that

he proscribe, banish, and anathematize

whoever withheld allegiance from their

particular parties. The Vita Constantini tells how the emperor attempted to end each

crisis by outlawing all opposition, thereby

inevitably sowing the seeds of the next

crisis. But how could one expect a simple

soldier to question the proposition that

compulsory loyalty is the secret of universal

peace, when it was being pressed upon him

by all the cleverest men of the age? “The

barbarians reverence God, because they fear

my power,” he had declared, and everyone had applauded his doctrine of compulsory

reverence. 89

But it didn’t work. No sooner had

Constantine removed his last civil and

military opponents than the issue between his

Christian and pagan subjects became acute.

No sooner had he “given profound peace and

security to the Church” by restraining her

pagan opponents than the churchmen started

accusing each other of heresy with a wild

abandon that surpassed—as the emperor

himself observed—any performance of the

heathen.90 No sooner had his successors removed the last heretic and received the

undying thanks of the church, than the true

believers were at each others’ throats. St.

Ambrose notes that it is harder to make

orthodox Christians live together in peace

than it is to eliminate heretics. 91 The problem was never solved, for the doctrine

of absolute, one-package loyalty would allow no compromise. 92

Consider next the landowners. The

aristocracy living on its great estates (though possessing the wealth of the cities as well)

was a characteristic fixture of Roman society

throughout historic times; “the personnel of

the ruling class might change,” as it did

under Vespasian and Diocletian, but that

“could not have changed the nature of those

classes themselves,” who always remained

true to a type and an ideal. 93 The victory of the church only strengthened their hold, for

they claimed Latin Christianity as peculiarly

their own, and it has recently been argued

with some plausibility that the breaking

away from the church of “fundamentalist”

sects, beginning with the Montanists, was “a

series of peasant movements” protesting the

capture of the church by the propertied

classes.94

Loyalty was the watchword of the great landowners: pietas, fides, and fortitudo were at all times “the three distinguishing

marks of the perfect Roman gentleman.” 95

Their typical representative in the fourth

century was “aristocratic, senatorial,

traditionalist, anti-oriental. ”96 But from Cicero it is clear enough that theirs was

loyalty to a class alone, and their slanted

interpretation reduced the noble abstractions

in which they dealt so freely to “merely

shopworn catch phrases without real

meaning in history.” 97 No word was dearer to them than libertas, the glory of free agency, but “the nobiles conceived of this popular political catchword as meaning

freedom for them to exercise their dignitas, "

and not for people without money. 98 In the fourth century they “had plenty to say about

their humanitas, philanthropia . . . their mercy, their pious serenity. . . . But such self-

praise carries no weight; the choice words are a mere empty form.” 99 In the Senate they called loudly for arms to defend civilization

—when no personal sacrifice was involved;

and when the barbarians were at the gates

they spent their time not in meeting the foe

but in hysterical attacks on possible

subversives.100 When one considers the magnificently planned and executed

defensive installations of the frontier, “one

cannot keep from being amazed,” say Diehl

and Marçais, “that they were not more

effective than they were, and that this

closely-knit network of skillfully deployed

fortresses let the invaders pass through it so many times.” This grim defect is attributed

(1) to the economies of the government,

which, while giving away enormous wealth

to individuals, so reduced the personnel of

the border forces that “the strong places,

badly manned, were simply förgötten, often

without garrisons,” and (2) to the low morale and frequent desertions of the

underpaid soldiers who remained. 101

Nobody who could pay for defense was

willing to do it.

The great landowners “appreciated

civilization and culture very highly,” says

Rostovzeff, “their political outlook was

narrow, their servility was unbounded. But

their external appearance was majestic, and

their grand air impressed even the

barbarians. . . . For the other classes they

had neither sympathy nor understanding.” 102

Their fault was not that they would enjoy the

good things of the earth, but that they would

enjoy them exclusively: “The earth is the

mother of all of us,” said the starving field

and factory-workers, “for she gives equally;

but you pretend that she is your mother

only.” 103 Their ideal was Cato, whose forthright and uncompromising dedication to

his own interests, whose unflinching devotion to self and steely resistance to any

ennervating impulse of sympathy for others

had about it something of sublime

integrity.104 Skimming the cream of the world’s natural resources on their vast tax-free estates, these men thought of themselves

as natural-born leaders of men; they oozed

the virtue and loyalty of the prosperous: why

should they not be loyal to Rome? They were

Rome!105 Under the early emperors “the state’s sphere of activity had been curtailed

to an astonishing degree; the state simply

secured peace and law in the world and then

turned it over to private exploitation.” 106

Deeply loyal to a system that gave them

everything, the great owners could not

understand why all others should not be just

as loyal. 107 Nor could they, who soon learned that the secret of survival was

absolute servility and had made an art of

groveling to secure their broad acres, have any patience with those who refused to play

the game.108

But when in the fourth century the

Imperial government went after a larger

share of the income in order to support the

costly wars of defense, the great landowners

displayed the quality of their patriotism by

resisting savagely and cunningly. They

quickly became experts in evading taxation

and shifting the expenses of war and

government to others. 109 But it was their busy speculation in grain that brought the

issue of loyalty into the open with the public threat of the Emperor Julian “to have all

gentlemen arrested” for sabotaging his

attempts at price control. They in reply

accused the emperor of low demagoguery in

trying to fix minimum grain prices in the face of drought and an artificial boom market

created by the army; and they not only

refused to sell at government prices, but bought up what grain they could at those

prices to resell on the black market or

outside the price-control zone. 110 Small wonder that bishops, government officials,

and the common people blamed “the rich”

for deliberately engineering famines that

were profitable to themselves. 111 Whether these charges were true or not (and Libanius

admits abuses), the grain scandals present a

typical large-scale clash of loyalties, with

each side accusing the other of treason to the respublica. 112

This partisan concept of loyalty poisons

the whole stream of Roman history. Curio,

says Cicero, was wrong when he pleaded

that the demands of the people beyond the Po

were just but inexpedient: he should have

known that demands cannot possibly be just

which are not expedient to our interests:

“non esse aequam, quia non esset utilis rei

publicae. ”113 This, the morality of Trimalchio, was death to any true fides. At the end of the fourth century when Stilicho

remained true to his master though it would

have served his interests to betray him,

native Romans could attribute his behavior

only to a lack of good sense—so completely

had they förgötten the meaning of fides at a time when loyalty to Rome was on the tongue

of every orator.114 Just so the great landowners, failing utterly to recognize real

loyalty when they saw it, sent their champion

Aetius against the very peasants who in an

“amazing” demonstration of loyalty to Rome

stopped Attila on the Catalaunian Plain and

in the end forced those peasants to join

forces reluctantly with the barbarians whom

they might have stopped for good had their

loyalty been trusted.115 “Whatever the frequency of peasant revolts during the third

and fourth centuries,” says a recent

investigator, “they reached such a climax in the first half of the fifth century as to be

almost continuous.” 116 These were not slave uprisings or barbarian invasions: it was the

scorned loyalty of the peasants, “ces hordes

indigenès qui dans leur rage détruisirent tout ce qu’il y avait comme oeuvres de la

civilisation” (those native hordes who in

their fury destroyed all the achievements of

civilization).117

Last come the leaders of education,

which, in the fourth century, means the

professors of rhetoric. It was, as we have

seen, through the activity of professional

rhetoricians that “the Greeks became aware

of themselves as the makers and bearers of

Western Civilization.” 118 By the fourth century the rhetoricians, by a process that

cannot be described here, had gained

complete and absolute control of every

department of public life.119 It was what

Ammianus calls “the yokes of the Empire,”

i.e., the specialists in words, the fast talkers, the experts on public relations, the

supersalesmen, who by substituting sound for

substance in their lush and busy careers

completely undermined the rickety structure

of the civilization which they claimed to be

rescuing. 120 The secret of success in these professions lay in their boasted power to

command loyalty, a talent for which the

world was willing to pay any price.

The ancients defined rhetoric as “the

technique of persuasion,” “the art of

convincing people,” or of convincing

everybody, of anything—for a fee.121 The art which keeps people stirred up from

necessitas (need) rather than from puritas (disinterested motives), scattering to the

public from its overflowing bosom an

abundance of delights, and thus leading them

to conform to its purposes—that art,

according to Augustine, is called Rhetoric. 122 The great power of rhetoric lay in its unique ability to create artificial

values, “to make unimportant things seem

important,” in Plato’s words or, in those of

Clement of Alexandria, “to make false

opinions like true by means of words. ”123

The rhetorician works with words alone: to

treat his profession as a science defeats its

purpose, Aristotle observes, which is to deal

not with real things but with words, and to

convince not by evidence, as science and art

must do, but by argument; 124 he is the supersalesman who sells not goods but, in

the last analysis, himself: “cupit enim se

approbare, non causam” (he desires to win

approval for himself, not his argument), says

the pious Seneca. 125

The secret of commanding and

controlling loyalty, rhetoric teaches, is

always to give people whatever they want:

unlike Pericles, who invariably gave the Athenians what they most needed and least

wanted, the Sophist studied to give his

public what it most wanted and least needed.

The very opposite of a true leader, the

rhetorician was by his own confession “the

slave of a thousand masters.” 126 Philo describes the general public as a harlot and

the rhetor as her minion, nay, her lapdog,

whose purpose in life is to obey her, wait on

her, and do all that gives her pleasure. It

would be hard to say who was the more

debauched by such a pact of mutual

corruption, the lady or her dog, for the rhetor demanded a terrible price for his toadying:

by giving the public exactly what it wants,

Augustine boasts, the orator makes them clay

in his hands, a helpless automaton without a

mind or will of its own, completely at the

bidding of the skillful word-master. 127 Dio Chrysostom and Lucian have told how this

irresistible predatory profession, jauntily sure of itself in handling the man in the

street, the gullible rich, and the lazy student population, always won out because it

always pushed downhill128—selling whiskey to the Indians was not a surer thing, or a

deadlier. Socrates prophesied in the Gorgias that a true teacher would have no more

chance of holding his own against the

smooth-talking Sophists with their easy but

flashy and pretentious instruction, than an

honest physician would have of winning

child patients in competition with a pastry

cook who prescribed nothing but dessert.

Rhetoric was the ruin of all hard and honest

thinking in the ancient world, but it paid big returns and swept all before it, to become the great heritage of the Middle Ages from

Antiquity. 129 Of the orating bishops, the glory of the fourth century, Gibbon says, “the true

size and colour of every object is falsified

by the exaggerations of their corrupt eloquence,” a verdict which subsequent

studies have fully confirmed. 130

The only form of rhetoric that retained

any real vitality in the fourth century was the panegyric, a formal set address in which the

orator, in the name of the people or Senate,

would declare undying devotion to the

emperor or any other leader, civil or

ecclesiastical, who had attained to a position of great political importance.131 Fides was the keynote, with ardent protestations of

unfailing loyalty, delivered in set,

conventional terms whose transfer from

pagan to Christian use may be traced on

coins and inscriptions as well as in the

orators.132 Augustine, himself a one-time professional panegyrist, joyfully announces

that the panegyric art, far from being

discredited by Christianity, has received a

new lease on life; for if rhetoric contributes

a much-needed spice to the Christian teaching, that doctrine in return offers the

exhausted panegyrist in the Christian God

what he most needs—a materia grandis of unlimited possibilities.133 “The pagan emperors had been traditionally devoted to

self-advertisement,” says Cochrane, “but it

remained for the first Christian sovereign to

discover a more effective instrument of

propaganda than any hitherto devised,” in the

Christian pulpit. 134

From the capital the vogue for

panegyrics spread, under government

supervision, to the provinces. A local

professor of rhetoric would be chosen to

address the emperor as if he were present,

and all people would be expected to applaud

like mad “to prove their loyalty. ”135 The whole business was carefully controlled: the

subject matter was prescribed, the time and

place of delivery fixed, and the orator

chosen by the very man who was to be acclaimed. M. Leclercq labors to exonerate

the panegyrists of the common charges of

being flatterers, liars, and pimps, on the

grounds (1) that they fooled nobody

(however hard, he admits, they tried), (2)

that they had no choice in the matter but had

to do what they were told (though they loved

every minute of it and fought for the

opportunity), and (3) that they were really

sincere.136 Precisely in this last argument lies the most damning charge against the

panegyrists, the secret of whose success was

to make themselves sincere—for a fee. This is the classic dilemma of the rhetorician,

who must employ all the exacting devices of

his art to persuade his hearers before all else that he has no art. 137 The sorriest victims of the dilemma were the fathers of the fourth

century who, as has often been noted, use

their most lush and artificial rhetoric to

condemn the use of rhetoric.138

The result of this sort of thing was a

ghastly air of unreality that characterized all attempts to win loyalty by formal persuasion.

When men tried to bolster up the vast inertia

of a sagging civilization with words alone, it was the world that remained unaffected,

while the noble words were squashed flat

and had all the meaning squeezed out of them

by the dead weight of reality.139 The most successful panegyric of the age was a

masterpiece in which the “ordinary reader . .

. seeks in vain some glimmer of

reasonableness, some promise of sense.” 140

The victory of the decadent rhetoric of the

fourth-century schools was complete and

conditioned all the thinking of the Middle

Ages. 141 Typical was the tendency to employ lofty abstractions, which imparts to Christian rhetoric an unmistakably pagan flavor which

persists to the present day. 142 The significant thing, however, is that the most movingly

eloquent protestations of loyalty, though they did produce thunders of applause, failed to

generate genuine loyalty, and the great

Chrysostom observes often and with

bitterness that the populace which recognizes

him as perhaps the world’s greatest orator

will not pay the slightest heed to his mildest admonitions, but continues to go about the

business of money-getting while he, Sunday

after Sunday, speaks to empty walls.143 The world remained unconvinced, and to the end

of the Middle Ages the darling theme of the

rhetoricians, “the dream of a united

Christendom . . . was seen to have been a

dream.” 144

Conclusion

Each of the three attempts to foster

loyalty in the century of crisis was a conspicuous failure. The disillusionment

with the ideological appeal of West versus

East is voiced in Jordanes’s commentary on

the Battle of the Catalaunian Plain which, far from being a cosmic struggle between

conflicting ways of life, proved to him only

one thing: When such a slaughter of nations

can be caused by the crazy obsession of one

man, or when the whim of some arrogant

chieftain can undo in an instant what it has

taken nature centuries to produce—that

proves that the human race lives for the

benefit of kings. 145 One-package loyalty was, as Alföldi shows, no less a hopelessly

artificial concept that could only ruin what it meant to save.146 “Men were aware of the danger that threatened,” writes Straub. “They

felt that the emergency of the time called for drastic decisions; but the absolute

domination of Divine Grace left little margin

[ Spielraum] for any attempts at political reform. It is thus by no means surprising that we are almost never confronted by any

concrete suggestion.” 147 One does not reform a holy system, and where the social order

was God’s order, “the human mind,” in

Bury’s words, “was cabined by the Infinite.

Thought was rendered sterile and

unproductive under the withering pressure of

an omnipresent and monotonous idea.” 148 It was an age of “utter incapacity to invent

anything new . . . devoid of all creative

power and helplessly submitting to current

practice.” 149

Partisan appeals to universal loyalty

completed the crippling process: the whole

Tragik of the Middle Ages, says Ladner, was the ruling out of all possibility of

compromise by a theory of loyalty which

was partisanship raised to the nth power (die ins Ungemessene gesteigerten

Einseitigkeiten). 150 “Reverence for Augustine,” writes Father Bligh, “forbids me

to say that his justification of persecution

was wrong; but its fruits were evil in the

centuries which followed, and we may

suspect that, if he had had as much

experience to reflect upon as we have,

Augustine would have reverted to his first

opinion.” 151 On the contrary, it is we who are reverting to Augustine’s second opinion.

Rostovzeff sums up all the evils of the

age we have been discussing under one

head: oversimplification. “Everywhere we

meet with the same policy of simplification,

coupled with a policy of brutal

compulsion.” 152 The “system of the late Empire, despite its apparent complexity, was

much simpler, much more primitive, and

infinitely more brutal” than what had gone

before. 153 “In times of crisis,” says Alföldi,

“when the choice of the Government is

simplified down to a plain ‘to be or not to be,’ the policy that wins is that of the fire-brigade, which elects to destroy the contents

of a house in order to save the naked

walls.” 154 And the ultimate expression of this blunt oversimplification was the army of

secret police, agentes in rebus, whose business was to check on everybody’s

loyalty. 155

The fourth century is not the twentieth.

But loyalty is a timeless thing, and if the

experience of the century of crisis proves

anything, it is that there is no problem of

loyalty. Conformity can be had by bribery, flattery, or force, but one can no more

legislate loyalty than one can legislate love, of which it is a part. “The professed object

of Constantine,” says Cochrane, “was to

legislate the millennium in a generation.” 156

The legislation of loyalty lay at the core of

his plan, and its miserable failure should

mean something to a modern world in which no ruler possesses a tenth of the religious,

political, and military prestige that

Constantine did. Since the essence of loyalty

is dis interested devotion, there is something distressing in the attempts of the fourth (or

any) century to conjure it up by appeals to

interest, fear, or expediency.

Yet the “loyalty problem” is no mere

question of semantics; the substitution of

some such word as “security” or

“conformity” for “loyalty” in designating the

Executive Order of March 1947 does not

really change the complexion of the thing.

Loyalty is one of the few words in existence

about whose meaning dispute is virtually

impossible. Everyone knows what loyalty is,

and what a desirable, nay indispensable

thing it is to the survival of any community.

Like honor and chastity, it is strongest when

least talked about, and thrives only in a

climate of uncritical acceptance. A virtuous investigation of loyalty is like a noisy

oration in praise of silence, and the

appearance of loyalty order and loyalty

legislation such as are found in the

Theodosian Code and elsewhere is a sign of

lost confidence, a desperate groping in

empty air for something which groping

fingers only push farther out of reach.

Two of the wisest contemporaries of

Constantine, reflecting upon his Nicene

Council, were not unaware of a serious

implication in the holding of formal

assemblies to decide upon the nature of God.

“For if they believed,” writes Athanasius,”

they would not be seeking as if for something

they did not have,” and Hilary says the same:

“The Faith must be inquired after, as if we

had none. The Faith must be written down,

as if there could be any baptism without faith in Christ! ”157 Just so, when we start defining

loyalty we demonstrate to the world that we no longer know what it is. That is the lesson

of the Age of Constantine.

Notes

This article was originally published

in Western Political Quarterly 6/4 (1953): 631-57, at a time when the loyalty of many patriotic Americans was being impugned by

political opponents.

Footnotes

^1. “We are facing an utterly new problem in American life. . . . Others believe that some

or all ‘loyalty measures’ taken to safeguard

the nation in the cold war reveal ignorance

of the lessons of history and violate

fundamental democratic principles.” Thus

Morris Ernst, Loyalty in a Democratic

State, ed. John C. Wahlke (Boston: Heath,

1952), vi. Cf. Public Affairs Pamphlet No.

179 (Ithaca: Cornell University, 1952), 1-6.

H. Westmann, “On Conflicts of Loyalties,”

Question 5 (Winter 1952): 5-15; C. R.

Nixon, “Freedom vs. Unity: A Problem in

the Theory of Civil Liberty,” Political

Science Quarterly 68 (March 1953): 88.

^2. András Alföldi, A Conflict of Ideas in the Late Roman Empire, the Clash between the

Senate and Valentinian, tr. Harold Mattingly (Oxford: Clarendon, 1952), 40. Cf. below,

n. 6.

^3. Johannes Straub, “Christliche Geschichtsapologetik in der Krisis des

römischen Reiches,” Historia 1 (1950): 52, citing Johann Burckhardt, goes so far as to

call it a crisis unique in history; cf. Johannes Straub, “Parens Principum,” Nouvelle Clio

3-4 (1952): 94.

^4. R. M. Henry, " Pietas and Fides in Catullus,”

Hermathena 75 (1950): 63, and 76 (1951): 48-57.

^5. “Carere patria intolerabile est. Aspice agedum hanc frequentiam, cui vix urbis immensae

tecta sufficiunt . . . ex toto denique orbe terrarum confluxerunt” (Being without a

country is unbearable. Look at this crowd,

for whom the roofs of this vast city is

scarcely enough. . . . They have gathered

from every part of the world), Seneca, Ad

Helviam Matrem De Consolatione XII. Cf.

Cicero, Oratio Pro L. Cornelio Balbo IX, 24 (“libertas id est civitas”); Claudius

Rutilius Namatianus, De Reditu Suo I, 66

(“urbem fecisti, quod prius orbis erat”), and

so forth. The philosophers of the time

“addressed themselves to a world of

déracinés. They preached . . . salvation in

‘society’ regarded as distinct from and

independent of political forms.” Thus

Charles N. Cochrane, Christianity and

Classical Culture (Oxford: Clarendon,

1944), 31.

^6. To the previously mentioned works of Alföldi, Straub, and Cochrane (especially

Cochrane’s second chapter “Romanitàs”),

add András Alföldi, The Conversion of

Constantine and Pagan Rome (Oxford:

Clarendon, 1948); Joseph Vogt, Constantin der Grosse und sein Jahrhundert (Munich: Munchner, 1949); Walther Eltester, “Die

Krisis der alten Welt und das Christentum,”

Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche

Wissenschaft 42 (1949): 1-19; André

Piganiol, “L’Etat actuel de la question

constantinienne 1939-49,” Historia 1

(1950): 82-96; Aldo Marsili, “Roma nella

poesia di Claudiano. Romanità occidentale

contrapposta a quella orientale,” Antiquitas 1 (1946): 3-24, and other studies cited in the course of this paper. For a complete survey

of the field and a demonstration of the great

increase of interest in it, K. F. Stroheker,

“Das konstantinische Jahrhundert im Lichte

der Neuerscheinungen 1940-51,” Saeculum

3 (1952): 654-80.

^7. Vogt, Constantin der Grosse und sein Jahrhundert, 12-15; Aelius Aristides, Orationes, ed. Wilhelm Dindorf (Leipzig: Weidmann, 1829), 14:206-8 (360-62); 225-27 (393-95); Prudentius, Contra Orationem

Symmachi II, 578-633; Claudius Rutilius

Namatianus, De Reditu Suo I, 47-66: “fecisti patriam diversis gentibus unam” (you have

created a single country for many diverse

peoples).

^8. Vogt, Constantin der Grosse und sein Jahrhundert, 16.

^9. See below, nn. 69-73; P. Chavanne, “Le patriotisme de Prudence,” Revue d’histoire et de litterature religieuses 4 (1899): 333-34, 412-13; Cassiodorus, Variae I, 21.

Gustave Bardy, L’Église et les derniers

Romains (Paris: Laffont, 1948), 48.

^10. Vogt, Constantin der Grosse und sein Jahrhundert, 13; Marsili, “Roma nella poesia di Claudiano,” 17-18, 23.

^11. Hugh Nibley, “The Hierocentric State,”

Western Political Quarterly 4 (1951): 244-47; reprinted in this volume, pages 123-26.

^12. Vogt, Constantin der Grosse und sein Jahrhundert, 19-20; Priscus Rhetor, De Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes 3, in PG 113:736; Jordanes, Historia Getica Getarum (Gothic History) 36; Claudius

Claudianus, Bellum Geticum (The Gothic War) 364-79; Horace, Carmen Saeculare I, 12 and 53-60.

^13. Priscus Rhetor, De Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes 3, in PG 113:726-29.

^14. Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 2 vols. (New York:

Modern Library, 1932), 2:256.

^15. Agathias, History II, 29-30, in PG 88:1393-95.

^16. Procopius, Anécdota XXV, 25.

^17. Salvianus, De Gubernatione Dei (On the Government of God) V, 3-11, in PL 53:96-97. The same sort of thing was going on 200

years earlier; Michael Rostovzeff, The

Social and Economic History of the Roman

Empire (New York: Oxford University

Press, 1926), 348-49.

^18. Priscus Rhetor, De Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes 1 and 3, in PG

113:704-5, 708, 716, where each side

accuses the other of retaining its subjects,

while denying the charge against itself. The Romans were constantly demanding the

return of “deserters” who chose to live

among the barbarians; E. A. Thompson,

“Peasant Revolts in Late Roman Gaul and

Spain,” Past and Present 2 (November

1952): 15-18. Thompson cites a number of

texts, including the fifth-century comedy

Querolus, illustrating the degree to which the Romans idealized the free and simple

barbarian way of life.

^19. Henri Grégroire, “La ‘conversion’ de Constantin,” Revue de l’Université de

Bruxelles 36 (1930-31): 231-34; and

Grégoire Cassimatis, “La Dixième ‘Vexation’

de l’Empereur Nicéphore,” Byzantion 7

(1932): 152-54, has spread consternation

among the learned by showing how

historians have confused and even reversed

the roles of the great protagonists.

^20. Eusebius, Vita Constantini (Life of Constantine) II, 4-6, in PG 20:981-93.

^21. Ibid. I, 28-31; II, 6, in PG 20:944-45, 985.

By an interesting coincidence, just such a

heavenly manifestation is attributed to Cyrus, the archetype of the divine king,

Xenophon, Cyropaedia IV, 2 and 15.

^22. Agathias, History IV, 29, in PG 88:1532.

^23. Hilary, Ad Constantium Augustum (To Constantius Augustus) II, 5, in PL 10:566-67.

^24. Ludwig Friedländer, Darstellungen aus der Sittengeschichte Roms, 4 vols., 8th ed.

(Leipzig: Hirzel, 1910), 2:338-39.

^25. “Eine Audienz bei Chosrau mit Vela, strenger Rangordnung der Dignitäre, dem

Silentiumsruf des Zeremonienmeisters

unterscheidet sich in nichts von der strengen

Etikette eines byzantinischen Silention” (an

audience at Chosrau’s court with veils, with

a strict ordering of dignitaries, with a

silentium called out by the master of

ceremonies cannot be distinguished from the

strict court etiquette of the Byzantine

silention); A. M. Schneider, “Das

byzantinische Zeremoniell und der alte

Orient,” Jahrbuch für kleinasiatische

Forschung 2 (1952): 163. The Roman

emperors were forced to adopt this ritual in the Prestigekampf (struggle for prestige) with the East, according to András Alföldi,

“Die Geschichte des Throntabernakels,”

Nouvelle Clio 2 (1950): 541.

^26. George of Pisidia, De Expeditione Persica II, 240-51, in PG 92:1226-27: “He [the General of Error] occupies himself with

musical instruments, cymbals, impious din

of song, dances of indecent women in lustful

nudity. While thou, our General of Wise

Panoply, dost take thy pleasure in Psalms

played upon mystic instruments, a godly

singing rejoiceth thy heart as thou holdest

solemn sport with virgins. . . . He puts his

hope in the moon, but suffers violent eclipse

seeking to eclipse thy sun.” On the exact

resemblance of Christ and Antichrist,

Romanus, De Judicio Extremo 8-10, in Jean B. Pitra, Analecta Sacra Spicilegio

Solesmensi Parata (Paris: Tusculan, 1876), 1:38-39. The antagonist is the perfect image

of the hero, but wickedly inverted, as in a

mirror: Eusebius, Life of Constantine II, 4,

in PG 20:981; Julius Firmicus Maternus, De Errore Profanorum Religionum (The Error

of the Pagan Religions) 23, in PL 12:1032-33; Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis XV de

Secundo Christi Adventu (Instruction XV

about the Second Coming of Christ) 12, in PG 33:885, 1639. Naturally the painful resemblance of the adversary to the hero

was attributed to a clever act of forgery by

the demons.

^27. Thus when Attila came upon a heroic painting in Milan depicting himself at the feet of the Roman emperor, he simply

transposed the figures of the two leaders—

the rest was as it should be, the clash being

not between “ideologies” but personalities

pure and simple, Suidas, cited by Gibbon,

Decline and Fall, 2:289, n. 53.

^28. This is fully illustrated by the references given, under the heading of barbarus and related words, in any large Greek or Latin

lexicon.

^29. Thus J. B. Bury, A History of Greece to the Death of Alexander the Great (London:

Macmillan, 1913), 230, who sees in the Persian War “the first encounter in that still unclosed debate.”

^30. Eduard Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, 4

vols. (Jena: Diederich, 1928), 4:222-23,

277-316, 315-16, 340-75.

^31. Ibid., 4:342.

^32. Cochrane, Christianity and Classical Culture, 65-72.

^33. Vogt, Constantin der Grosse und sein Jahrhundert, 59; Cochrane, Christianity and Classical Culture, 188-89, sees in these titles an Oriental borrowing inseparable from

the “diadem and jewelled robes instituted by

his [Constantine’s] immediate predecessors.”

^34. Catullus beautifully illustrates both these points; cf. Henry, " Pietas and Fides in Catullus,” 63-68.

^35. E.g., Prudentius, Contra Orationem Symmachi II, 488-91 and 503-23; Marsili,

“Roma nella poesia di Claudiano,” 11-13.

^36. Salvianus, On the Government of God VII, 2-3, in PL 53:130-32; V, 2-4, in PL 53:91-

96. This reflects the traditional belief that “it is natural for Greeks to rule over

Barbarians,” Euripides, Iphigeneia in Aulis 1400, and that “among Barbarians no

distinction is made between women and

slaves,” Aristotle, Politics 1252B. The unquestioned acceptance of Roman

Goodness remained part of the permanent

heritage of the West, Nancy Lenkeith, Dante and the Legend of Rome (London: Brill, 1952), 17.

^37. On government patronage and control of literary education, Heathcote W. Garrod,

The Oxford Book of Latin Verse (Oxford: Clarendon, 1944), xxvi-xxxvii (introduction).

^38. Rostovzeff, Social and Economic History, 458, 123-24, 201, 414; Vogt, Constantin der Grosse und sein Jahrhundert, 19-21; F.

Vittinghoff, “Zur angeblichen Barbarisierung

des römischen Heeres . . .,” Historia 1

(1950): 389-407; Zosimus, Historia Nova

II, 34.

^39. The embassy was almost wrecked when the report reached Attila that one of the Romans

had said at dinner that his master was a god while Attila was only a mortal; the remark

nearly produced a riot.

^40. Synesius, Oratio de Regno 15, in PG

66:1093.

^41. Ibid., in PG 66:1096-97.

^42. Ibid., in PG 66:1132, 1096-97.

^43. On imperial foreign policy during Justinian’s reign, see Charles Diehl and Georges

Marçais, Le monde oriental 395 à 1081

(Paris: Presses universitaires, 1936), 79-81.

^44. Ibid., 71-72, 79; Jordanes, Gothic History 38.

^45. Sulpicius Severus, Chronicon Historia Sacra II, 3, in PL 20:130: “exercitibusque nostris, urbibus atque provinciis permistas

barbaras nationes . . . inter nos degere, nec

tamen in mores nostros transire, videamus.”

^46. Victor Vitensis, De Persecutione Vandalica 5, in PL 58:255b.

^47. Lenkeith, Dante and the Legend of Rome, 4.

^48. Constantine Porphyrogenitus, De Administrando Imperio (On the

Administration of the Empire) 13, in PG

113:184-85.

^49. Cf. the hysterical security rules of Valens, given in Ammianus Marcellinus XXX, 1,

and discussed by Gibbon, Decline and Fall, 1:856-58, nn. 53-59.

^50. Describing the siege of Ancona by the Saracens, a Florentine monk writes: “Ignis hi

conficitur tantum per Paganos/ Ignis hic

exterminat tantum Christianos/Incantatus

namque est per illos prophanos/ Ab hoc

perpetuo, Christe, libera nos.” Cited in

Charles Du Cange, Glossarium ad

Scriptores Mediae et Infimae Latinitatis, 3

vols. (Paris: Osmont, 1733-36), 3:1308-9.

^51. For Cicero the solution of “the problem of leadership in a free state,” was the existence of a natural, unforced loyalty—“concensus,

concordia ordinum.” Cochrane, Christianity and Classical Culture, 58-59.

^52. Rostovzeff, Social and Economic History, 449.

^53. The essence of Romanitàs is restoration,

according to Cochrane, who notes of Constantine’s program: “Once more, as in

the far-off days of Augustus Caesar, the

Roman world was stirred by a sense of fresh

hopes and fresh beginnings,” Cochrane,

Christianity and Classical Culture, 183. In his inscriptions Constantine claims to be

restoring the Empire “to its ancient splendor

and glory,” Eusebius, Life of Constantine I, 40, in PG 20:956. Caelius Sedulius, Carmen Paschale, in PL 19:549-752, is simply a Christian elaboration of the Carmen

Saeculare that launched the Principate.

Restoration is the normal theme of the

panegyrics: even Authulf in taking over

Romania calls himself “Romanae

restitutionis auctor” (the father of the

Roman restoration), Orosius, Historiae

adversum Paganos (History against the

Pagans) VII, 43, in PL 31:1172.

^54. For new light on the special terminology which demonstrated the “lealismo dei

Cristiani” (loyalty of the Christians) to the

old majesty, see L. Alfonsi, “L’epistola I

clementina, i papiri magici, i ludi saeculari,”

Aegyptus 27 (1947): 111-14. Cf. Juvencus, De Laudibus Domini, in PL 19:385; and Juvencus, Triumphus Christi Heroicus, in PL 19:385-88, for typical ties between the old loyalty and the new.

^55. Compare Julian’s painted glory, Sozomen, Historia Ecclesiastica (Ecclesiastical

History) V, 17, in PG 67:1265-69, with Constantine’s as described in the whole

fourth book of Eusebius, Life of

Constantine, in PG 20:1115-229. Also Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis XIV de Christi

Resurrectione, in PG 33:841-44; F. Gerke,

“Das Verhältnis von Malerei und Plastik in

d. Theodos.-Honorianischen Zeit,” Rivista

di Archaeologica Cristiana 12 (1935): 140: the new art of majestas was the result of a

“politisch gewordenen christlichen

Weltanschauung” (politicized Christian world

view). The super-ceremonial was no longer

mere form, but a “Wirklichkeit auf einer

neuen und höheren Ebene des Seins” (reality

on a new and higher plane of being),

according to Schneider, “Das byzantinische Zeremoniell und der alte Orient,” 154.

^56. Elias Bickermann, “Die romische Kaiserapotheose,” Archiv für

Religionswissenschaft 27 (1929): 21, citing Vegetius, II, 5. Cf. Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History X, 4 and 9, in PG 20:848-80, 901-6; Eusebius, De Laudibus Constantini 17, in PG 20:1429-32, 1357; Eusebius, Life of Constantine II, 19 and 29, in PG 20:936-37, 1005-8. F. Cumont, “L’éternité des

empereurs romains,” Revue d’histoire et de litterature religieuses 1 (1896): 435-52. The New Order is greater and holier (timiotera) than heaven itself, according to John

Chrysostom, Expositio in Psalmum

(Exposition on Psalm) 148, in PG 55:483.

^57. Ammianus Marcellinus, XIV, 6, 3, and 6:

“Virtue and Fortune have formed a pact of

eternal peace . . . the tranquility of Numa’s

time has returned.” Eusebius, De Laudibus

Constantini 17, in PG 20:1429; Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History X, 4 and 9, in PG

20:848-80, 901-6; I, 3-4, in PG 20:68-80;

IV, 7, in PG 20:316-21 (quoting panegyric orations); Lactantius, De Justitia V, 6-7, in PL 6:569-74, 590-92; Epiphanius, Adversus Haereses III, 2, 7, in PG 42:784-85, and III, 2, 2-3, in PG 42:776-77; Jerome,

Commentarius in Isaiam Prophetam

(Commentary on Isaiah) 18:66, in PL

24:674, 885; John Chrysostom, De Sancta

Pentecoste Homilia (Homily on the Holy

Pentecost) 1, in PG 50:454; John Chrysostom, Contra Judaeos et Gentiles,

quod Christus Sit Deus (Against the Jews

and the Gentiles That Christ Is God) 11-12, in PG 48:829-30; Ambrose, Epistolae (Epistles) 12, in PL 16:987-90; Cyprian, Epistolae (Epistles) 7, in PL 5:246-51; and Cyprian, Liber de Lapsis (On the Lapsed),

in PL 4:479; Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis XVIII de Carnis Resurrectione XII, 18, in PG 33:1049, and so forth.

^58. The quotation is from Gibbon, Decline and Fall, 1:644, describing the legend of Constantine’s vision. The justice of its

application in this instance may be seen from

J. Gage, “Stauros Nikopolos: La victoire imperiale dans l’empire chrétien,” Revue

d’histoire et de philosophie religieuses 13

(1933): 370-400, on the steps by which

conflicting “Mystiques triomphales” were

ultimately fused into a single whole in the

Christian Imperial Cult. “The Roman world,

whether for the moment dazzled by the

prestige of the imperial physician or, perhaps because of its sickness ready for the most

desperate expedient, appears to have

accepted his ministrations without much

visible indication of the scepticism which

they deserved,” thus Cochrane, Christianity and Classical Culture, 197.

^59. Caecilius, Octavius IV-VIII.

^60. Straub, “Christliche Geschichtsapologetik,”

58-60, 76-77; Chavanne, “Patriotisme de

Prudence,” 349, 385, 400, 412.

^61. Orosius, History against the Pagans V, 2, in PL 31:921-22.

^62. Prudentius, Contra Orationem Symmachi II, 816-17: “Sed tantum distant Romana et

barbara quantum/Quadrupes abiuncta est

bipedi vel muta loquenti.” Cf. Ambrose, Epistolam ad Romanos I, 14, in PL 17:57.

For the Byzantine emperors “barbarian” is

synonymous with “pagan,” and

intermarriage with barbarians is a crime,

Constantine Porphyrogenitus, On the

Administration of the Empire 13, in PG

113:185. A famous Byzantine formula states

that there are four mothers of heresy:

Barbarism, Scythism, Judaism, and

Hellenism; John Damascus, De Haeresibus,

in PG 94:677; Epiphanius, Anacephalaeosis, in PG 42:840-45, 849; Chronicon Paschale, in PG 92:112. A fourth-century wood

carving from Egypt depicts the “Vertreibung

der Barbaren von der Feste des Glaubens,”

the Faith and Romania being identical, Josef

Strzygowski, Orient oder Rom: Beiträge

zur Geschichte der spätantiken und

frühchristlichen Kunst (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1901), 81-84, table 3.

^63. Lenkeith, Dante and the Legend of Rome, 25, citing the twelfth century Pseudo-Irnerius. How Christianity actually deepened

the gulf between Barbarian and Roman may be seen from Origen, Commentaria in

Epistolam Pauli ad Romanos (Commentary

on the Epistle to the Romans) I, 14, in PG

14:861; cf. Jerome, Commentarius in

Epistolam ad Galatas (Commentary on the

Epistle to the Galatians) 2:3, in PL 26:380.

^64. Thus Tatian, Oratio adversus Graecos I, 27, 30, in PG 6:804-5, 865, 868; see especially R. Massuetus, Dissertatio de Valentino, in PG 7:44-49; Clement of Alexandria,

Stromata I, 15-17, in PG 8:776-802; Tertullian, De Anima (On the Soul) XILX, in PL 2:733-34; Didymus Alexander, De Trinitate (On the Trinity) II, 18, in PG

39:729. Later writers compared this

Christian teaching with like teachings of the

Greek Philosophers: Nicephorus Callistus,

Ecclesiastical History IV, 10, in PG

145:1000; Nicephorus Gregor, Byzantina

Historia VIII, 8, in PG 148:569; Theodoret, Graecarum Affectionum Curatio 5, in PG

83:944-52.

^65. Straub, “Christliche Geschichtsapologetik,”

63-64; cf. Claudius Claudianus, Panegyric on the Fourth Consulship of the Emperor

Honorius 98-99; Marsili, “Roma nella

poesia di Claudiano,” 15; Lenkeith, Dante

and the Legend of Rome, 18: “If Rome were destroyed the physical basis of the

legitimacy of both Popes and emperors

would be lost together.”

^66. Alföldi, Conversion of Constantine and Pagan Rome, 117; cf. 106, 110, 112, 115-16. The fusion of Church and Empire is not

without its modern panegyrists, e.g., A.

Causse, “Essai sur le conflit du chistianisme

primitif et de la civilization,” RHR 78 (1918): 98-142, and 79 (1919): 175-223.

^67. Walter Volker, “Von welchen Tendenzen liess sich Eusebius . . . leiten?” Vigiliae

Christianae 4 (1950): 157-80. Roman

secular history was also rewritten to prove

that the Romans had from the first been

God’s people; Lenkeith, Dante and the

Legend of Rome, 9.

^68. Eusebius, De Laudibus Constantini 16, in PG 20:1421-29; cf. Prudentius, Contra

Symmachum II, 578-95 and 634-40.

^69. Lactantius, De Ira Dei 11, in PL 7:110.

^70. Aristides, Oration 14 ( To Rome), ed.

Dindorf, 200 (349), boasts that Rome has

achieved what Asia has always attempted to,

the rule of one man over all the world; in

Rome the Asiatic ideal is realized, ibid., 205

(359), 222 (389). “There are not two suns in

the heavens; how can the people have two

lords?” asks Ghenghis Khan, Friedrich E.

Krause, Cingis Han: Die Geschichte seines

Lebens nach den chinesischen

Reichsannalen (Heidelberg: Winter, 1922), 25. Bayazid’s official pronouncement reads

exactly like an excerpt from the Theodosian

Code: “The Koran says, ‘Disquiet is worse

than death,’ the Sultan, the shadow of God

upon earth, and the Lord of all true

believers, ought to reign in conformity with

the ever-to-be-imitated example of God,

alone upon the throne, and without

possibility of anyone revolting against him.”

Edwin S. Creasy, History of the Ottoman

Turks, 2 vols. (London: Bentley, 1854-56),

1:50-51. Typically Asiatic is Basil’s panegyric to the Pope of Alexandria, who

shall trample his enemies under his feet:

Basil, Liturgia Alexandrina, in PG 31:1632.

Though Constantine “rejected the

pretentions of the Oriental sacred

monarchy,” according to Cochrane,

Christianity and Classical Culture, 179, he retained and strengthened all that the West

had learned from it; ibid., 186, 188-89. The

Church Fathers of the age remind us at

times that all the pomp of this earth is mere

empty show, “a game for children,” a brief

masquerade, and so forth, e.g., Eusebius,

De Laudibus Constantini V, 6, in PG

20:1316-20, 1337-40; John Chrysostom, In

Epistolam II ad Corinthios Homilia

(Homily on the Second Epistle to the

Corinthians) 15, in PG 61:508-9; but these are the commonplaces of the schools, in

striking contrast to Hilary’s frank and

sorrowful admission that the Church “diligi

se gloriatur a mundo, quae Christi esse non

potuit, nisi eam mundus odisset” (boasts of

being loved by the world, which could not be Christ’s [church], unless the world hated

it), Hilary, Contra Arianos (Against the

Arians) 4, in PL 10:611.

^71. For Claudius Claudianus, The Gothic War, passim, all who deny humble submission to

Rome are faithless destroyers of peace,

mad, demented, feeble-minded, insane,

praedones, proditores, scellerati,

presuntuosi, superbi, barbari, clienti,

audacii falsi inerti, impii, rabiosi, perfidi, and so forth, see Marsili, “Roma nella poesia

di Claudiano,” 17-18.

^72. Hilary, Against the Emperor Constantius 15, in PL 10:593, 586, 602-3; cf. Hilary, Contra Arianos, in PL 10:609-10: peace is the greatest of blessings, but whoever accepts

any peace but ours is the Antichrist.

^73. Lucifer of Caliaris, De Non Conveniendo cum Haeresibus, in PL 13:774, 786-87, 790-91, 806; Hilary, Against the Emperor

Constantius 15, in PL 10:598-99, 583.

^74. Hilary, Against the Emperor Constantius 8, in PL 10:584-85.

^75. Lucifer of Caliaris, De Non Conveniendo cum Haeresibus, in PL 13:806.

^76. Thus Optatus, De Schismate Donatistarum (On the Donatist Schism) II, 13, in PL

11:966, can show that “the true Church

cannot be cruel,” since “dum sanat,

vulnerat” (it causes pain while healing), ibid., in PL 11:1020. Those whom we kill are not martyrs, since only members of our church

can be martyrs, ibid., in PL 11:1013-15, 1019; our side cannot persecute, since we

are in the right, while anything that

displeases us is necessarily persecution, ibid, in PL 11:1013, 1017; since we have the Scriptures written in our hearts, all Scripture we cite condemns you, while any you may

cite against us is void, ibid., in PL 11:1101.

Pacianus, Epistolae (Epistles) II, 5, in PL

13:1061-62, assures the Novatians that his

side does not persecute, since it attacks only with words: “We deal with you like doves,

ore potius quam dente confligimus.” Yet Optatus tells the opposition that when they

attack with words only they cut more cruelly

than any swords, “slaying with the sword of the tongue,” Optatus, On the Donatist

Schism II, 13, in PL 11:979, 983. Augustine, Contra Donatistas (Against the Donatists)

II, 11, says that persecution by the Church is

“the persecution of love,” and that as long as the Emperor persecutes on the right side he

does well, Augustine, Epistolae (Epistles) 43, in PL 33:321-23.

^77. Lucifer of Caliaris, De Non Conveniendo cum Haeresibus, in PL 13:768-70, 774, 777, 787, 791. True, Lucifer is extreme, but

Athanasius, Ad Luciferum Epistolae 2, in PL 13:1040-41, who calls him the most

inspired voice of the age, is himself no less

severe: “Christus recusat et respuit

obsequium tuum” (Christ rejects and

disdains your compliance), he writes to a

too-tolerant emperor, Athanasius, Epistolae (Epistles) XVII, in PL 16:1002-5.

^78. “The common-sense republicanism of Tiberius Caesar had prompted the sentiment

“deorum injuriae dis curae” (the gods’

injuries are matters of concern to the gods).

Constantine, however, undertook to support the prestige of deity by a law which forbade

blasphemous utterances under pain of a fine

of one-half one’s goods.” Cochrane,

Christianity and Classical Culture, 204.

^79. John Chrysostom, Homilia in Joannem (Homily on John) LIV, 4, in PG 59:301; Hilary, Against the Emperor Constantius II, 9, in PL 10:585: “unigenitus Deus, quem in me persequeris” (the only begotten God,

whom you persecute in me).

^80. Augustine, Enarrationes in Psalmos (Narrations on Psalms) 62:15, in PL

36:684-85; Augustine, De Civitate Dei (The City of God) XX, 19, 3, in PL 41:686.

“How can we be blessed unless we loathe

you utterly?” is Lucifer’s refrain, in Lucifer of Caliaris, De Non Conveniendo cum

Haeresibus, in PL 13:770-71.

^81. Augustine, Contra Julianum Pelagianum (Against Julian Pelagius) IV, 30-31, in PL

44:753-54, 763: “Unbelievers do evil even

when they do good.” Cf. Augustine,

Sermones (Sermons) CXLI, 3-4, in PL

38:777; Augustine, Epistles 113, in PL

33:322; Augustine, Narrations on Psalms

57:15, in PL 36:684-85. To call the emperor Antichrist when he is mistaken “non est

temeritas, sed fides; neque inconsideratio,

sed ratio” (it is not rashness but loyalty, not thoughtlessness but concern), and so forth,

Hilary, De Non Conveniendo cum Hereticis,

in PL 13:806. When the Emperor puts his official severitas at the disposal of the Church, “neither brother, beloved wife, nor

son” should be spared, all loyal subjects

being armed “to dismember the

sacrilegious,” Julius Firmicus Maternus, The Error of Pagan Religions 30, in PL

12:1048. Writers of the fourth century

sometimes yield to principles of humanity,

“nec potest aut veritas cum vi, aut justitia

cum crudelitate conjugi” (truth cannot be

joined with violence nor justice with

cruelty), says Lactantius, Divinae

Institutiones (Divine Institutions) V, 20, in PL 6:615; yet Lucifer can twist this

sentiment into a proof that the Church, being

true and just, is never cruel, see n. 76

above. Jerome must confess a definite

conflict between the justa judicia of the Church and her irrationabili (!) clementia, Jerome, Epistolae (Epistle) 17, in PL

22:828, while Optatus pays a touching

compliment to kindness when he declares

that the Donatists should suffer death

because they lack charity! Optatus, On the Donatist Schism III, 8, in PL 11:1018-19.

^82. John Chrysostom, De Virginitate 5, in PG

48:536-37.

^83. Alföldi, Conflict of Ideas in the Late Roman Empire, 40.

^84. John Chrysostom, Exposition on Psalm 50, in PG 55:530; John Chrysostom, Homilia in Isaiam 6:1 (Homily on Isaiah 6:1) IV, 1-2, in PG 56:121; cf. John Chrysostom,

Homilia in Matthaeum (Homily on

Matthew) XXXIII, 1, in PG 57:389, and John Chrysostom, Contra Judaeos et

Gentiles, quod Christus Sit Deus 6 and 12-13, in PG 48:821, 830-31; Eusebius,

Ecclesiastical History X, 4, in PG 20:847-

80; Zeno, Tractatus II, 44, in PL 11:496:

“zizania . . . in laeta frumenta mutavit” (he

changed tares into useful grains).

^85. Cedrenus Georgius, Historiarum Compendium, 2 vols. (Bonn: Weber, 1838-39), 1:662.

^86. Basil, De Spiritu Sancto (On the Holy Ghost) 76-77, in PG 32:213-17. This agrees perfectly with the description in John

Chrysostom, Adversus Oppugnatores Vitae

Monasticae III, 8-10, in PG 47:361-65. The fourth-century fathers “cast aside truth and

decency [Anstand] and converted

controversy into the business of questioning

personal loyalty,” thus Martin Schanz,

Geschichte der römischen Literatur, 4 vols.

(Munich: Beck, 1914), 4:1:534.

^87. Basil, On the Holy Ghost 76-77, in PG

32:213-17. According to Chrysostom, the

spirit of the times is well expressed in the

common remark: “I wish an earthquake

would come and kill everybody but me; then

I would be the richest man in Antioch!”

John Chrysostom, In Epistolam II ad

Timotheum (Commentary on the Second Epistle to Timothy) VII, 1-2, in PG 62:638.

^88. Jakob C. Burckhardt, Die Zeit Konstantins des Grossen (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 1929), 452. Optatus affirms that if

chastity and virginity are found among any

barbarian nations it is because something has

gone wrong, for that simply cannot be, in

Optatus, On the Donatist Schism III, 3, in PL 11:999.

^89. Sozomen, Ecclesiastical History II, 28, in PG 67:1013-17. Later churchmen used

Constantine’s example to spur his successors

to acts of increasing violence against

unbelievers, P. Petit, “Libanius et la Vita Constantini,” Historia 1 (1950): 581. In the Theodosian Code XVI, 1, 2, all who differ

from the Emperor’s theology are declared

“extravagant madmen” who “must expect to

suffer the severe penalties, which our

authority . . . shall think proper to inflict

upon them,” cited in Gibbon, Decline and

Fall, 2:8. Constantine shows an “obvious lack of any sense of the limitations of law,”

says Cochrane, Christianity and Classical Culture, 204; “Ses conseillers l’ont fait vivre dans un monde d’illusions” (his advisers let

him live in a dream world), Piganiol, “L’état

actuel de la question Constantinienne 1939-

49,” 95.

^90. The Emperor’s famous letter is quoted in Eusebius, Life of Constantine II, 71, in PG

20:1044-45; Socrates, Ecclesiastical

History I, 7, in PG 67:53-60; Sozomen, Ecclesiastical History I, 16, in PG 67:909-12.

^91. Ambrose, Epistles 12, in PL 16:988-89.

John Chrysostom, De Sancto Babyla,

Contra Julianum et Gentiles (On Saint

Babyla, Against Julian and the Gentiles) 8, in PG 50:544, says that the Church was better off under pagan emperors, because

the members fought less savagely among

themselves.

^92. Gerhard Ladner, “Das heilige Reich des mittelalterlichen Westens,” Welt als

Geschichte 11 (1951): 143-53, especially 149. See below, n. 146.

^93. Thompson, “Peasant Revolts in Late Roman Gaul and Spain,” 20.

^94. John Morris, “Early Christian Orthodoxy,”

Past and Present 3 (February 1953): 12, cf.

14: “In 500 A.D. the new world was

Christian; it was a very different Christianity.

The church . . . belonged to the world of the

rulers, not of the ruled.” Cf. Jean-Paul

Brisson, “Les Origines du danger social dans

l’Afrique chrétienne du IIIe siècle,”

Recherches de science religieuse 33 (1946): 280-316.

^95. Henry, “Pietas and Fides in Catullus,” 63.

^96. Marsili, “Roma nella poesia di Claudiano,”

23.

^97. C. D. Gordon, Review of C. Wirszubski,

“Libertas” as a Political Idea at Rome

during the Late Republic and Early

Principate, in Phoenix 6 (1952): 28, where the quotation is found.

^98. Ibid.

^99. Alföldi, Conflict of Ideas in the Late Roman Empire, 37.

^100. Gibbon, Decline and Fall, 91-193, comments caustically on this.

^101. Diehl and Marçais, Le monde oriental, 78-79.

^102. Rostovzeff, Social and Economic History, 477. Gibbon, Decline and Fall, 2:142: “The nobles of Rome express an exquisite

sensibility for any personal injury, and a

contemptuous indifference for the rest of the

human species.”

^103. Philostratus, Vita Apollonii (The Life of Apollonius of Tyana) I, 15; cf. Zonaras, Annals XII, 10.

^104. Plutarch, Marcus Cato 5, says the Athenians treat their mules better than Cato

did his faithful slaves, but the Roman

nobility regularly followed his example,

Zonaras, Annals XII, 10. Though Cato

opposed the foreign excesses of the rich,

Cochrane, Christianity and Classical

Culture, 30-32, the “villa-system” and foreign policy he advocated as well as his

own acquisitiveness all favored the

tendencies he was combatting, ibid., 34-35,

45, 55.

^105. Tacitus, Histories II, 61, blushes with shame that “a plebeian had the presumption

to mix his name with the great events of the

time.” The Historia Augusta reflects the violently partisan spirit of the nobility in the fourth century, according to Alföldi, Conflict of Ideas in the Late Roman Empire, 25. Its fierce prejudices are apparent in Plutarch,

Coriolanus; Ammianus Marcellinus, XXVII, 4; Livy, VII, 6-7; Appian, Roman History

XII, 4; XI, 4; Zonaras, Annals VII, 14, and so forth.

^106. Vogt, Constantin der Grosse und sein Jahrhundert, 46.

^107. They were genuinely shocked when their Scythian houseslaves (who had been

captured by trickery and enslaved in

disregard of solemn promises) staged a

rebellion in Asia Minor—treachery, they

called it, base ingratitude! Eunapius, De

Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentus 6, in PG 113:657. The same thing is described centuries earlier by Appian, Roman History

XII, 4; XI, 4. “If it were not for the wealth possessed by the rich,” they said, “the poor

would have no one to lend them money in

time of famine and so starve to death!”

Zonaras, Annals VII, 14. They believed all things were created for them alone,

Symmachus, Epistolae (Epistles) II, 46; even life was given to other creatures as a

means of preserving their flesh until they

were ready to eat or sell it, Varro, De Re Rustica (On Agriculture) II, 4 and 10; III, 3-6; including human flesh, ibid. II, 10;

Seneca, Epistles I, 95; Philo, On Abraham 20-21.

^108. “Ruere in servitium consules, patres, eques.

Quanto quis inlustrior, tanto magis falsi ac

festinantes.” (Consuls, senators, and knights

were rushing into slavery. The more

distinguished the individual, the greater his

hypocrisy and haste.) Tacitus, Annals I, 7, 1, cf. 35. The groveling and timidity of the

Senate is a leitmotiv of Roman history:

Polybius, Histories X, 3; Cicero, Letters to His Friends VI, 1; Tacitus, Annals XIII, 32;

Aelius Lampridius, Heliogabalus 20; Aelius Lampridius, Commodus 18-20; Suetonius, Caius Caligula 11; Dio, Roman History LIII, 20; LXXIII, 20; LXXVII, 8; LXXIX,

20.

^109. Thompson, “Peasant Revolts in Late Roman Gaul and Spain,” 12; Salvianus, On

the Government of God IV, 6, in PL 53:76-77; A. Hoepffner, “Un aspect de la lutte de

Valentinien Ier contre le Sénat: La création

du ‘Defensor plebis,’” Revue historique 182

(1938): 225-38.

^110. P. de Jonge, “Scarcity of Corn and Cornprices in Ammianianus Marcellinus,”

Mnemosyne, Ser. 4, vol. 1 (1948): 238-45; on the complex speculations of the corn-dealers, P. de Jonge, “A Curious Place in

Ammianus Marcellinus Dealing with Scarcity

of Corn and Cornprices,” Mnemosyne, Ser.

4, vol. 1 (1948): 73-80.

^111. “The world is turned upside down that a few men may be magnificent,” Salvianus,

On the Government of God IV, 4, in PL

63:75; see Rostovzeff, Social and Economic History, 475-77, 451; Ambrose, De Officiis Ministrorum (On the Duties of the Clergy)

III, 7, in PL 16:169; Basil, Homilia Dicta Tempore Famis et Siccitatis, in PG 31:304-9, 321, 324; Cassiodorus, Variae II, 12; Philostratus, The Life of Apollonius of

Tyana I, 15.

^112. William E. Heitland, The Roman Republic, 3 vols. (Cambridge: University Press, 1909),

2:235-37, describes the growth of the

system in which the owner “took little

thought of the horrors perpetrated with his

sanction in the country side,” and the only

means of protest was rebellion.

^113. Cicero, De Officiis III, 22, 88.

^114. Straub, “Parens Principum,” 115; E.

Nischer-Falkenhof, Stilicho (Vienna: Seidel, 1947), 149-52.

^115. Thompson, “Peasant Revolts in Late Roman Gaul and Spain,” 20; cf. 14-15.

^116. Ibid., 19-20.

^117. Walther von Wartburg, Les origines des

peuples romans (Paris: Presses universitaires, 1941), 269; Ammianus

Marcellinus, XXXI, 6; Sidonius, Epistolae

(Epistles) II, 1, 3-4; Orosius, History against the Pagans V, 9, 5; Joannes

Malalas, Chronographia XVII, 420; Appian, Roman History III, 1; 1, 5; IV, 6, 43; Tacitus, Histories II, 51; II, 61; Zonaras, Annales VII, 14. Heitland, Roman Republic, 2:379, notes that it was traditionally the

freemen rather than the slaves who ravaged

the great estates.

^118. Erwin Rohde, Der griechische Roman und seine Vorläufer (Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel, 1900), 319.

^119. Ibid., 316-17, 347; Schanz, Geschichte der römischen Literatur, 3:235.

^120. Ammianus Marcellinus; the four yokes are orating Sophists, lawyers, legal advisers, and hack-writers; cf. Philo, On Drunkenness 79.

The good men were snowed under by the

fast-talkers, Dio Chrysostom, Discourses

XXXII, 6-13; Lucian, Astrology, Rhetor

Praecox (A Professor of Public Speaking),

and Nigrinus.

^121. Aristotle, The “Art” of Rhetoric I, 1, 14; I, 2, 1; Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XXXV, 7.

^122. Augustine, De Ordine II, 13, in PL

32:1013.

^123. Plato, Phaedrus 267A; Clement of Alexandria, Stromata VIII, 376, in PG

9:753. It can “exercise persuasive powers on

any subject at all,” says Aristotle, The “Art”

of Rhetoric I, 2, 1.

^124. Aristotle, The “Art” of Rhetoric I, 2, 11-13.

^125. Seneca, Controversiae IX, preface 1. “The beginning of rhetoric is the probable, the

process is epicherrema, and the end is

persuasion . . . and admiration,” Clement of

Alexandria, Stromata VIII, 376.

^126. Philo, On Joseph XIII, 64; XIV, 67; cf. Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XLVII, 19.

^127. Augustine, De Doctrina Christiana (On Christian Doctrine) IV, 6; 29; 37; and 51, in PL 34:91-115; cf. Gustave Combès, Saint Augustin et la culture classique (Paris:

Plon, 1927), 54-55.

^128. Dio Chrysostom, Discourses 32-34; Lucian, Nigrinus; The Dead Come to Life

or the Fisherman; Rhetor Praecox; The

Dream or Lucian’s Career.

^129. F. James E. Raby, A History of Secular Latin Poetry in the Middle Ages, 2 vols.

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1934), 1:1-47. The

education of Augustine was “celle d’un lettré

de la décadence formé par le grammaticus et

le rhéteur, avec en plus la dialectique.

Grammaire et dialectique! Mais ce sont là les

bases réeles de la scholastique” (that of a

well-read person of the late Empire

influenced by the grammaticus and the

rhetorician, as well as dialectic. Grammar

and dialectic! But these are the real

foundations of scholasticism)! Henri I.

Marrou, Saint Augustin et la fin de la

culture antique (Paris: Boccard, 1938), 275.

The only difference between Augustine’s

brand of Christian rhetoric and that of the

pagan schools was that his was a simpler,

streamlined course, even more superficial

than the other, ibid., 517-18, denoting “cet abaissment du niveau général de la

civilization, qui déjà, tout autour d’Augustin, annonce les temps barbares” (that lowering

of the general level of culture that heralds,

all around Augustine, the onset of the

barbarian age), 518.

^130. Gibbon, Decline and Fall, 1:941. Johann Zellinger, “Der Beifall in der altchristlichen Predigt,” in Festgabe Alois Knopfler

(Freiburg im Breisgau: Herder, 1917), 403.

Eduard Norden, Die antike Kunstprosa vom

VI. Jahrhundert v. Chr. bis in die Zeit der Renaissance, 2 vols. (Leipzig: Teubner, 1898), 2:623-24.

^131. Henri Leclerq, “Panégyrique,” in Fernand Cabrol and Henri Leclercq, Dictionnaire

d’archéologie chrétienne et de liturigie, 15

vols. (Paris: Letouzey and Ané, 1907),

13:1:1037-38.

^132. Ibid.; G. Manthey, “Il significato primitivo della legenda ‘Pax perpetua’ sulle monete

degli imperatori romani,” Rivista di

Archeologia Cristiana 28 (1952): 45-75.

^133. Augustine, On Christian Doctrine IV, 26, in PL 34:117-18. On the early Christian abhorrence of rhetoric, Zellinger, “Beifall in der altchristlichen Predigt,” 403-4.

^134. Cochrane, Christianity and Classical Culture, 207-8; cf. Italo Lana, Velleio Patercolo o della propaganda (Turin:

University of Turin, 1952), 261, 294.

^135. “Et les assistants applaudissent avec fureur pour prouver leur fidélité" (and the assistants applaud furiously in order to show their

loyalty). Leclerq, “Panégyrique,” in Cabrol

and Leclerq, Dictionnaire d’archéologie

chrétienne et de liturgie, 13:1:1043.

^136. Ibid., 13:1:1042-44.

^137. Thus in the great prototype of Latin Panegyrics, that of Pliny the Younger to

Trajan, the orator protests loudly and

repeatedly that this is a sincere, not a rhetorical, discourse: Pliny, Panegyricus 54

and 72-74.

^138. Combès, Saint Augustin et la culture classique, 75. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa,

2:623-24; Rohde, Der griechische Roman, 348.

^139. Rohde, Der griechische Roman, 348; Dio Chrysostom, Discourse XXXVI, 18;

XXXVIII, 40; Polybius, Histories VI, 57.

^140. Raby, History of Secular Latin Poetry, 1:73; Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2:652.

^141. See n. 128 above; Engelbert Krebs, “Die Geschichte der scholastischen Methode bis

zum Beginn des 13. Jahrunderts,” Römische

Quartalschrift 27 (1913): 33. Of a piece with the panegyric was the grandiose

monumental architecture, “Panegyric in

stone” that the Middle Ages inherited from

this period, Gerke, “Verhältnis von Malerei

und Plastik,” 140, 159-60, 162-63; K. Felis,

“Die Niken und die Engel in altchristlicher

Kunst,” Römische Quartalschrift 26 (1912): 24-25. It was Gaul, “das Land der

Rhetoric,” that preserved antique culture

through the Middle Ages, Norden, Antike

Kunstprosa, 2:631-33.

^142. Marsili, “Roma nella poesia di Claudiano,”

21. The first three pages of Pliny’s model

panegyric to Trajan (Pliny, Panegyricus) contain the abstractions: castitas, sanctitas, libertas, fides, veritas, humanitas,

frugalitas, clementia, liberalitas,

benignitas, continentia, potestas, pietas, abstinentia, mansuetodo, divinitas,

temperantia, facilitas, amor, gaudium,

modestia, moderatio, virtus, gloria,

gratiae, laus, severitas, reverentia,

conordia, concentus, hilaritas, gravitas,

simplicitas, honor, dignitas, and maturitas.

A full-blown “Christian” vocabulary.

^143. John Chrysostom, De Incomprehensibili Dei Natura III, 6, in PG 48:725; John Chrysostom, De Baptismo Christi 1, in PG

49:363-65; John Chrysostom, Reprehensio

1, in PG 51:143-45; John Chrysostom, De Melchisedeco, in PG 56:257; John Chrysostom, Homily on Matthew XXXIII,

1-3, in PG 57:387-92; John Chrysostom, Homilia 1, in PG 63:461-62, and Ecloga de Non Contemnenda Ecclesia Dei et Sanctis

Mysteriis Homilia 9, in PG:623-25, 629.

^144. Frederick M. Powicke, Legacy of the

Middle Ages (Oxford: Clarendon, 1938), 46.

The failure of Rome to capture the real

allegiance of Europe is the theme of

Powicke’s essay. See below, n. 150.

^145. Jordanes, Gothic History 36.

^146. András Alföldi, “Die Geburt der kaiserlichen Bildsymbolik,” Museum

Helveticum 8 (1951): 215.

^147. Straub, “Christliche Geschichtsapologetik,”

63.

^148. John B. Bury, History of the Later Roman Empire, 2 vols. (New York: Dover, 1958), 1:16.

^149. Rostovzeff, Social and Economic History, 469.

^150. Ladner, “Das heilige Reich des mittelalterlichen Westens,” 149.

^151. John Bligh, “The ‘Edict of Milan’; Curse or Blessing?” Church Quarterly Review 153

(1952): 309. Origen believed that conversion

to Christianity would save the Empire.

“Alas!” says Bligh, “Things did not turn out

that way. . . . Corruption and oppression

continued unabated, and brought the tottering Empire to its fall.” Ibid., 313. Have we any guarantee that an even less pristine

Christianity can overcome that “corruption

and oppression” which earlier Christianity

could not even alleviate?

^152. Rostovzeff, Social and Economic History, 476.

^153. Ibid., 459; cf. 452-53, 457, 473: “There was indeed equality of a negative kind, for

no political freedom was tolerated, no

remnant of self-government was left, no

freedom of speech, thought, or conscience

was permitted, especially after the victory of Christianity.”

^154. Alföldi, Conflict of Ideas in the Late Roman Empire, 40.

^155. Rostovzeff, Social and Economic History, 460.

^156. Cochrane, Christianity and Classical Culture, 211.

^157. Athanasius, De Synodis (On the Councils) I, 1-2 and 6-7, in PG 26:684, 689; Hilary, To

Constantius Augustus II, 6, in PL 10:566-67, 569; cf. Philostorgius, Historia

Ecclesiastica II, 3, in PG 65:468; Basil, Epistolae (Epistles) 82, in PG 32:457.

Victoriosa Loquacitas: The

Rise of Rhetoric and the

Decline of Everything Else

The declining years of ancient

civilization were beset by a feverish

preoccupation with rhetoric which suggests

nothing so much as a hopeless alcoholic’s

devotion to the bottle. Everywhere the

ancients give us to understand that rhetoric is their poison, that it is ruining their capacity to work and think, that it disgusts and

wearies them, and that they cannot let it

alone, because it pays too well and, having

destroyed everything else, it is all they have left of remembered grandeur. It should be

immediately apparent that this arresting

phenomenon may have more than an academic interest for our own age;

nevertheless, from this point on the reader, if there be such, must draw all his own

parallels and conclusions. Our bemused and

saddened gaze is directed to the ancient

scene alone.

But was rhetoric a specific thing that we

should make such wild charges against it?

That is a question the ancients themselves

often asked. “It is often claimed,” says

Cicero, “that there is no such thing as an art of speaking.” People protest, he explains,

that the greatest orators never took a lesson, that the subject matter of rhetoric is dubia et incerta (questionable and uncertain) since an orator can speak on anything, and that public

speaking is an essential part of many

professions rather than a monopoly of one.

Hence, fine speech may be a gift or talent,

but it is not a science or art.1 To these

objections our Tully gives the stock answers, which in his opinion outweigh them: the

“great orators” in question were such only in

the common report of the vulgar and by

proper standards would perhaps not deserve

the name of orator at all; it is true that speech is a gift of nature but nature’s gifts can

always be made into something finer by a

proper discipline;2 as to vagueness of substance, if you want to insist on the

rigorous rules of science “then it seems to

me that there is no such thing as an ars

oratoris [speaker’s art],” but are we bound by such rules? What difference does it make

whether it is an ars or not, so long as it does something that no other discipline can do?

After all is said, the orator remains a

specialist unique in his kind, and once he has been briefed on any subject “can speak on it

far more elegantly (ornate) even than the man who taught him about it.” 3

By far the most common ancient definition of rhetoric (Quintilian concludes

after a survey of the field) is simply vis persuadendi, the power of faculty or skill of persuading. 4 Corax, the father of the art, called it that; Dio Chrysostom calls it “the

technique or skill of persuading the many.”

“The goal of the orator’s trade is to

persuade,” says the great Augustine; the

business of rhetoric is to move people, to

make an impression. 5 That is also the business of music, poetry, and drama, and

Cicero duly observes that the orator has

much to learn from the masters in those

fields, and as they have their props and

instruments so he has his: he works with the

spoken word and must know not only how to

make words ring with conviction but also

which words will convince.6

Neither the definition nor the nature of

rhetoric changed throughout the long

centuries of classical antiquity. Compare a description of the rhetoric of the fifth century B.C. with that of the fifth century A.D.:

The rhetorical art of the Old Sophistic

[writes Schmid] aimed at convincing the

thinking man by compelling arguments

or veiled and misleading pseudo-

arguments, by undeniable truth or its

substitute, by a carefully worked-out

probability made indistinguishable from

truth itself, to the point of winning his

assent to the speaker’s proposition; it

sought to inspire confidence in the

speaker as a solid and irreproachable

Citizen, hence the emphasis on a

blameless public life—even if it was so

only in appearance.7

St. Augustine has given [says Father

Combès] a rigorous and convincing

(achevée) analysis of all the parts, all the

powers, and all the seductions of the rhetorical art, showing that it is necessary, in order to inspire the soul of one’s hearers

with the frisson sacre, to seize upon that soul by means of a learned dialectic, to charm it

by a cunning oratory, draw it along by a

moving eloquence and, before everything, to

multiply the prestige of the spoken word by

that of a virtuous life.8 In almost a thousand years all that changed was the nature of the

audience, which had become under the

tutelage of rhetoric less intellectual and more emotional.

Ancient rhetoric achieved its perfection

in three rapid steps. The first is represented by the untutored eloquence of the great

statesmen of the Periclean Age, with

Pericles himself as the classic example, the

second by the conned and written speeches

of the next generation, and the third, which

overlaps the others in time but survives them

by many centuries, by the activities of the professional orators, beginning with the

Sophists.9

Philosophy plus rhetoric produces

Sophistry. “The Old Sophistic,” says

Philostratus, “considered rhetoric necessary

to Philosophy. ”10 The man who first most successfully promoted the formal study of

rhetoric was that same Gorgias whom the

Sophists hailed as the father of their art. 11 By mixing rhetoric with philosophy he turned it

to Sophistry, for which offense Plato takes

him grimly to task. The charge is that he is

turning his talents from the honest search for truth to the business of cultivating

appearances.12 That is exactly what his teacher Empedocles (whom the younger

Aristotle calls the inventor of rhetoric)13 had done; fretting like Dr. Faustus at the

limitations of the mind and despairing of

arriving at truth in the short span of a human life,14 Empedocles found satisfaction in pretending before the public that he had

already achieved all knowledge and

power. 15 He becomes the most magnificent of quacks and the father of a long line of

skillful impostors whose success depended

wholly on their adroit and irresistible sales

talk.

Gorgias was as disillusioned as his

teacher; he wrote three famous books to

prove (a) that nothing exists, (b) that if it did, we could not know it, (c) that if we could,

we could not communicate our knowledge to

another, and having thus thoroughly debunked

the program of searching for truth the hard

way, cultivated a new and wonderful art of

finding success the easy way. He worked out

a technique, says Philostratus, which enabled

him to speak off-hand on any and all

subjects, and to prove or disprove any point

on demand, thereby bringing against himself the shocked and scandalized charge of

“making the worse appear the better

reason.” 16 Traveling everywhere, he proved to the world that “nothing could stand up to

the arts of the rhetor”; displaying with

words, which captivated the fancy of the

rising generation and all that followed, was

actually a philosophical nihilism, Schmid

points out, that made a hash of all values,

including the sacred nomos—the moral

order of society—itself. 17

Gorgias shares with his friend

Protagoras the glory and guilt of selling

rhetoric to the world. Protagoras concluded

that he was wasting his time trying to sound

the secrets of the universe in a short lifetime, burned his books in the marketplace, and

turned to teaching rhetoric, achieving the

immortal fame of being the first man to make

a hundred minas at the trade. 18 His famous

dictum that man is the measure of all things led only too easily to the rhetorical gospel

that anything goes, “the Philistine morality”

which in the end destroyed Greek

civilization. 19 Among a long list we cite only these two, the first and greatest of the

Sophists; in proportion as their successors

were less gifted than the masters, they were

less scrupulous. With the so-called Second

Sophistic the rhetorical schools, having won

over the emperors to their program and

thereby having gained control of public

education, no longer felt it necessary to

continue the old lip-service to science and

philosophy but openly opposed and bested

them at every turn. “A host of men

possessing small knowledge and no skill,”

says one observer, completely captivated the

public by substituting sweet sounds for

ideas; issues gave way to personalities, the

most popular speaker being the best

entertainer. 20 The Second Sophistic aimed at nothing but selling the public exactly what it wanted; the freshness and cockiness of the

Old Sophistic that had enabled its key

figures to match wits and words with a

Socrates, a Plato, or an Anaxagoras in a

brilliant tussle of ideas was gone, and in its place was only a shrewd and studious

striving to please. 21 The Sophists had outbrazened the old reproaches and by a

generation of calculated charm and

magnanimity made the name of Sophist an

honorable and envied one; “the confidence

and self-satisfaction of these men show that

they were entirely unaware of the utterly

decadent nature of their accomplishment. ”22

To the ancient mind the apex of human

success, the highest prize to which any man

could attain, was to be a Sophos, one of those heroes of the mind, typified by the

Seven Sages, who, after giving wise laws

and examples to their own cities, wandered free of earthly passions and attachments

through the universe, selfless and aloof, as

spectators of God’s works, seeking only

knowledge and carrying with them the

healing blessing of true wisdom, especially

of statemanship, for all who sought or

needed it. 23 Hailed by adoring multitudes—

who often saw the aura of divinity around

them—humbly petitioned by great cities and

magnificent potentates, these incorruptible

wise men represented the pinnacle of real

human attainment. 24 This matchless success, the very essence of success, was from

Empedocles on the particular objective of

rhetoric, the Sophists fancying themselves as

true successors of the Sophoi. 25 Like them, they sought to give laws to cities, reconcile

warring factions, advise governors and

emperors, instruct communities on matters of

public health and economics, and serve as

commentators and guides in world affairs.26

The very first Sophists had found vast

captive audiences waiting for them, whole

nations assembled at the great games and

convocations of cities to which they were

sent as ambassadors. 27 In the later period from the heart of Asia to the Pillars of

Hercules we behold great cities assembled

in the breathtaking splendor of the theater,

hanging on the words of the great traveling

orator—between the elephant act and the

great rape scene.28 He tells them funny stories and improving homilies, he boldly

rebukes their defects and excesses, orders

the huge throng like a child to behave itself, or commends it on its good order and fine

appearance. He delights the city with an

outsider’s praise of its size and shining

beauty, or pours withering scorn on its luxury and immorality. He flatters his hearers’

intelligence with his confidential manner as

the great news-commentator who knows the inside stuff, discussing big world issues in

clever, conceited, short-winded discourses.

And they listen to him for centuries on end

because he represents civilization and saves

them from boredom. “All I ask,” cries the

great Chrysostom to the people of

Alexandria, “is to be counted among your

diversions.” 29 So they shouted themselves hoarse and paid cash on the line.

And the Sophist, unlike the Sophos, took the cash. The classic test of the early

Christians by which one distinguished

between a true and a false prophet was

whether the man took money or not. The

same test marked the Sophist from the

Sophos, according to Plato. The teaching of rhetoric, says Dio Chrysostom, should raise

up a generation of orators to be “saviors of

their cities,” only unfortunately he must

report that the prospective demigods are

wholly absorbed in the quest for fame and money. 30 “People thought Hippias, Polus, and Gorgias were real Sophoi, " he says. “I can’t put on a show like they did, either

mantic, sophistic, rhetorical, or flattering.” 31

It is plain what they were after and how they

intended to get it.

The key to the Sophist-rhetorical

technique of persuasion is probability. By

clever syllogisms the trained rhetor could

turn any proposition into a probability,

which he could in turn build into a certainty

by high-powered emotional appeal. That

was the orator’s one-two punch that nothing

could stand up to—first to the head, then to

the solar plexus—the characteristic Sophist

combination of genuine mental adroitness

with unabashed hamming.32 The main thing was to establish the probability. The first

Sophists showed the way to do this by

breaking down the thing that made the

Greeks uniquely great, the high moral wall between seeming and being. 33 Seeming is as near as you can ever get to being, Protagoras

and Gorgias argued— doxa, appearance, is all we ever have to go by anyway; we can

never really say that a thing is so, but only that it seems so—“Man is the measure of all things.” The best training for the orator,

Cicero declares, is to “dispute about

everything, taking both sides of every

question and picking out whatever appears

probable in every proposition.” 34 The less truth there is in an orator’s cause, his Brutus declares, the better the job he must do from

the probability angle. 35 “The aim of rhetoric,” says Celsus, “is to speak with

persuasion on dubious subjects of public

interest. ”36 Clement of Alexandria has given an interesting analysis of rhetorical

argument, its starting point, its method or

procedure, and its final goal. The beginning,

he says, is the probable, an opinion or an appearance; the process is that of feeling

one’s way (epicheirema), taking cues from the opposition, adroitly shifting back and

forth between logic and emotion (when the

opponent gets emotional, call him down to

earth, when he appeals to reason, ask where

his heart is); and the goal is to cause a

sensation, pull off a personal triumph, and

become an object of wonder and

admiration. 37 In every case the probable is the little handful of stuff on which the orator goes to work; his business is to build it up

into something great. “The highest merit of

eloquence,” writes Cicero, “is to amplify the

object of discussion . . . to exaggerate and

amplify by speech.” 38 “The rhetorical trade makes small things great and great things

small,” says Plato. 39 A classic illustration of this is Lysias’s famous oration of the fig tree.

It is apparent from the beginning and the

conclusion of the oration that it had been proved to everyone’s satisfaction that the

sacred fig tree that Lysias’s client was

charged with having destroyed had not

existed; there had been a mistake. One would

think that would settle the matter, but that is the point where Lysias takes up his argument.

It is not the facts about the fig tree that

interest him but the probabilities of the case: would his client be the type of man to do

such a thing if there had been a fig tree? That for him is the whole issue. It is not surprising that the orator lives in a world of high-sounding intangibles— res, humanitas,

honores, savitas, officia, gratiae, laus,

commendationes, admiratio, and so forth—

which on every page of Cicero’s letters turn

out to be but a verbal screen for a hard and

sordid game of exploitation and survival

played without scruples and without

loyalties. “We must allow the rhetor to make

false, daring, somewhat misleading and captious statements,” Gellius smugly

observes, “providing he keeps within the

bounds of probability,” and he disarmingly

explains that the rhetor must be permitted

that latitude since it is his business to stir people up, his gravest offense being not the

championing of falsehood but any refusal to

defend it in a client’s interest. 40

Such statements as that, meant to be a

defense of the profession but actually a

rather damaging indictment of rhetoric,

proclaim the uneasiness that is never far

from the surface of ancient treatises on

oratory, the awareness that there is

something basically wrong about the thing.

No one denied, of course, that rhetoric could

be abused—“cannot any good thing be

misused?” asks Antony, 41 but the question was whether it was bad as such, by nature.

That was a disturbing question which could

hardly be asked of an honest trade, and the rhetoricians hurt their case by protesting too much, constantly calling attention to the

billowing smoke by insisting that the fire

was not a serious one. Everywhere the

defenders of ancient rhetoric give the thing

away by unconsciously damaging statements:

the Sophists, for example, claimed to be

proud of their calling, yet the worst thing one Sophist could call another was a Sophist.42

Themistius, a dean of Sophists and rhetoric,

protested to his university colleagues that he deserved to be called a philosopher rather

than a rhetorician, since he spoke the truth. 43

Gellius claims that Metellus’s speeches are

so honest that they actually deserve to be

read by philosophers, and that his honesty is

so great that he never has to avail himself of every orator’s rightful prerogative of lying. 44

It is usual to call any very clever man a

rhetor, according to Philostratus, “even if he

is honest.” 45 St. Augustine is no doubt reflecting the same popular sentiment when

he concludes a letter, whether unconsciously

or in jest, “But I must restrain myself, lest I be thought by you to be engaging in

rhetorical rather than truthful activities.” 46

Certainly he, like the other great fathers of

his century, admitted that rhetoric was a false and mendacious art, even while confessing

that he found it a very useful and attractive

one. 47 Cicero’s very proper assurance that a rhetor will not hesitate to speak the truth

when it serves his purpose48 is more damaging than any long catalogue of charges

brought against rhetoric by its enemies. And

how he gives himself away in his impatience

with the philosophers’ manner of delivery!

The philosophical style, he says with

distaste, is much too soft, it lacks popular

appeal, it is not ear-catching, has nothing

punchy about it, no emotional fireworks—no

volcanic rage, fierce accusations, pathetic appeals, nothing sharp and cunning: “It is

chaste and upright,” he concludes, “an

uncorrupted virgin, so to speak.” 49 And what was his rhetoric by contrast?

The final plea of the orators in defense

of their art was the protest that unscrupulous and unqualified men had misrepresented it

inside the profession and out. Rhetoric is a

terrible instrument in the hands of the wrong

man, we are assured; it is often necessary to

defend things like murder which, though bad

in themselves, are under certain

circumstances innocent and praiseworthy—

the orator can make them seem good or bad

at will, and so the most important

qualification for every orator to have is

honest intent, without which “nothing is more

pernicious in public or private affairs than

eloquence.” 50 So we get the constant refrain that the orator must be a paragon of virtues;

his is the most difficult and demanding of all arts requiring qualities of character and

brain that are virtually non-existent in this

imperfect world. 51 Rhetoric is the art of perfection itself; if it is not perfect, it is nothing, for nothing is sadder than a great

attempt that falls short.52 There is no excuse for stupidity here, let alone immorality;

rhetoric should be left strictly alone by those not properly endowed for it. 53 But who is properly endowed? To that question the

experts threw up their hands in despair and

declared in a single voice that the perfect

orator simply does not exist. The choice was

between perfection and a fiasco—and

perfection was out of the question!

If nothing is rarer than a good orator,

nothing is commoner than bad ones. The

rewards of rhetoric are tremendous; are such

rewards to be left lying about unclaimed

until the perfect orator comes along? As

might be expected, the worst people took to rhetoric like ducks to water. 54 For rhetoric preached the gospel of success. The chance

for everyone to “succeed” was, Mommsen

declares, the soul and essence of the

principate, its justification for being, and its driving power. 55 It was the school of rhetoric under the benign patronage of the

Good Emperor that offered this plum to

every ambitious youth in the Empire, and

“people of every class became inflamed

with a desire to achieve the new

‘success.’” 56 The orator’s philosopher, says Cicero, is not Aristotle (who loathed

rhetoric), but Carneades, because he was

always successful: “He never supported a

cause that didn’t win or opposed one that did

not fail.” 57 Lucian illustrated the spirit of rhetorical education in his story of the young man who came to Harmodes, the greatest

flute player of the time, to take lessons, with

the specification that he was interested not in becoming a good flautist but only in

becoming a successful one. 58 Which is a reminder that Isocrates, the founder of the

first real school of rhetoric, ruled against the flute as a waste of time—it didn’t pay off. 59

From the time of Isocrates on, wrote

William Schmid, “naked self-interest . . .

ruled in the rhetorical schools. ”60 Success meant getting ahead: all else was eliminated.

Cicero simply cannot understand those

Greeks who actually like to talk about things

that are both hard and impractical in the

schools; those people have no word for

“inept,” he says with scorn, but play with ideas for their own sake; that for him is

against the whole spirit and purpose of

rhetoric, which aims to get results and no

funny stuff—we should keep our boys away

from such studies, he cautions.61 Why study anything but rhetoric? is Seneca’s

challenge:62 what good is astronomy except for fixing horoscopes and keeping

appointments? “Mathematics teaches me to

make of my fingers organs of avarice,”—that

is as far as Seneca can see; music is no

good, he says, because it will not stop fears

or still appetites, as rhetoric will; “geometry teaches me to measure a field, how much

better to know how to measure a man?”—

human engineering is what pays; and who

cares about the niceties of grammar when

you can sell people without them? 63

Seneca’s interest in things went only so far

as they would support his case; but even the

case concerned him wholly and simply as a

pretext for pushing his own career cupit

enim se approbari, non causam was his

slogan—“it is yourself you are selling after

all.” 64

For the rhetor success meant three things

—fame, wealth, and power. Fame came first;

it is the one thing every orator wants. The rhetorical brotherhood glamorized their

success with great skill both because they

enjoyed doing so and because it helped

business, and the youth of the world became

easily obsessed by an insanum gloriae

studium. Praise and glory are what everyone wants in this life without exception, Cicero

insists; for his own part, whatever he does

has just one object: “To plant in the world an everlasting memorial of myself. ”65 Let no one bring prudish charges of vanity or

selfishness against this, for “even the

philosophers inscribe their names on those

very books which they write against love of

fame!” 66 Even the rhetors who affected intellectual superiority to such things sulked terribly when people failed to recognize and

applaud them in public places. 67

People admire rhetors, Philostratus

reports, much as they admire skillful doctors,

seers, musicians, and even artisans, but in this particular case their admiration is mixed with caution—they distrust the admired

orator as a man who is out to promote

himself and and will use any means to do

it. 68 The rewards of rhetoric were great in polite society, the business world, and

politics. 69 The government sponsored the rhetorical schools as “nurseries for

statesmen,” from which it could always

replenish the ranks of high government

officials. 70 Pathetically eager to recognize even the feeblest signs of talent with

"$50,000 grants for $100 ideas” the state actually cut the sinews of true statesmanship

by confining the training of its gifted citizens to the make-believe world of the schools—a

toy world of toy ideas.71 Still, however poorly trained, “the high officials,” Philo

observed, “are simply overwhelmed by an

uncontrollable stream of wealth.” 72 The

orator was a pusher who never missed a chance to put individuals under obligation to

him—“vobis honori et amicis utilitati et

republicae emolumento esse” (to be a glory

to yourselves, a benefit to your friends, and a source of profit to the state). 73 They kept careful track of personal credits like funds in a bank, a regular bookkeeping of honors and

obligations (you find it in Cicero’s letters)

that could be incurred by words and paid off

in the same coin. Words were legal tender,

but the rates were not fixed. “Bassus brings

you an empty purse and a speech,” Libanius

writes in a letter of recommendation. “Thank

God who has given us eloquence, and

remember that you owe your own position as

head of a province to your talent as a

speaker. . . . Reward Bassus and thereby you

will encourage others to study rhetoric.” 74

In its vagueness and all-pervasiveness

the term rhetoric came very close to our

own “business,” or better, “public relations.” No one could say exactly what it

was, yet no one had the slightest doubt about

its real nature or its absolutely predominant

place in the world. The rhetorician was a

general promoter, ingratiating himself with

powerful individuals or groups to run off

with a handsome cut of the profits from

clever deals engineered by himself, handling

other people’s affairs in the law courts,

guiding political opinion, generally flattering and running errands for the great—the god

Mercury, the winged messenger and factotum

with the money-bags. Hermes the thief, with

the ready tongue and winning manners shows

how established the type really is. The rhetor is “a pushing, driving, money-chasing

operator,” says Lucian, “who leaves any

sense of decency, propriety, moderation, and

shame at home when he goes to work. ”75 “I do not make money,” Dio protests, “I am not

interested in crooked deals. . . . I do not promote things in the market place—for I am

not a rhetor!” 76 “During those years,”

Augustine confesses in lush rhetorical terms,

“I taught the art of rhetoric, and, myself the victim of cupidity, trafficked in . . .

loquacity.” 77 “I hate to say it,” another one of the greats confesses, “but verecundia

(modesty, decency, restraint), in itself a most amiable trait, is a positive vice in an orator, since it will make him hesitate, change his

mind, or even stop talking to think things

over.” The remedy for this infirmity is, he

says, fiducia, complete self-confidence. 78

That was Gorgias’s secret of success in the

beginning: never lose your never—keep

talking no matter what happens. Some of the

most humane and sensitive men, like

Libanius, Themistius, or the great bishops of

the fourth century, showed uncanny skill and

dexterity in trimming and double-talk that

kept them in lucrative government positions under the utterly conflicting policies and

tyrannical administrations of such emperors

as Constantine, Constantius, Julius, and

Theodosius. Theirs was the “flexanima atque

omnium regina oratio,” the always-winner

that could talk anybody out of anything. 79 On the lower level, the cities swarmed with

fast-talking operators who could always get

it for you wholesale and whose skill at

making something super-colossal out of

nothing was excelled only by their know-

how in the art of smearing. 80

As the Sophos was unattached and

incorruptible, so the Sophist was unattached

and irresponsible. As a speaker he was not

held responsible for what he said in the heat

of an address,81 and as a politician he answered to no one but himself.82 Critias was not responsible for wrecking Athenian

democracy, Philostratus insists, for it was

doomed anyway. So with a clear conscience he left his ruined city to spend years of

plotting and intrigue in other cities and

finally retired in the odor of wealth and

sanctity, leaving a trail of wreckage behind

him.83 The Sophist who told a young man that he could get mentioned in all history

books by killing Philip of Macedon felt no

pangs of guilt when the fellow carried out

the deed; had not Gorgias protested with

wide-eyed innocence: “If a rhetor chooses to

use his skill for evil ends, is that any reason for hating his teacher or expelling him from the cities? ”84 “Your mind is sick,” Diogenes told a rhetor, “but your tongue feels

nothing.” 85 What is wrong with that?

Isocrates asks with impatience. Is it a crime

to want to get ahead in the world?

Everybody works for money; what is wrong

with talking for money? Doesn’t everybody practice piety, justice, and other virtues for

what they can get out of them? 86

This unwillingness to accept

responsibility, which reaches its perfection

in the great Christian orators of the fourth

century,87 went hand in hand with a cynical admiration for the clever ruse, the lie that

was not a lie: the world recalled with

delight how Protagoras was taken into court

by one of his students who had promised to

pay him a huge fee in case he won his first

lawsuit. The complaint was that Protagoras

was overcharging, and it was the young

man’s first case, so that if he lost he would

not have to pay Protagoras anything, and if

he won he would, of course, not pay. The

same story was told of Corax and Tisias, the

traditional founders of rhetoric. 88

It was always remembered that there

was a bad as well as a good side to rhetoric;

but what was not recognized was a fatal

Gresham’s Law by which bad rhetoric, art, and education, like bad money, will always

force the better product out of circulation.89

There can be no truce between the two, since

each is a standing rebuke to the other.

Socrates made this clear when he declared

no quarter with the half-truths of the

Sophists, who were just as determined to

settle his hash as he was theirs—and in the

end succeeded, as he predicted they would.

He explains how this Gresham’s Law works

when he assures Gorgias that a pastry cook

prescribing only dessert to his foolish

patients can always put an honest doctor out

of business. 90 The teachers of rhetoric competed openly and brazenly for students,

first against the philosophers, and then, once the state had guaranteed support of at least

three Sophist teachers even in the smallest

town, against each other. 91 The competition was terrific, with each professor, like

Socrates’ pastry cook, promising easier and shorter courses than anyone else, along with

assurances of good jobs, big pay, and

brilliant careers—" And you can do it all lying down!” said the prospectus. 92

Just as no parent who could possibly

afford it would deny his child decent

clothing, so ran the argument, so neither

could he deny them the more essential

adornments of the mind on which society

placed an even greater value.93 Everybody’s children had to go to school—but not to

study!94 They came for fun and horseplay, “a spoiled and conceited generation, insistent

on knowing all the answers overnight,”

impatient of any work or restraint, without

reverence for anything but success. 95

Rhetoric, of course, was all they ever

studied: “Parents don’t want their children to study the hard way,” Petronius complains,

but “insist that eloquentia is that most

important thing in the world and expose them to it from infancy.” 96 We are not interested in making experts, the most successful

educationist of his day announced, “all we

intend to give the student is enough

background to enable him to follow the

authors.” 97 This background was the skopos or prothesis, that is, the “main idea” of each subject, the flimsy skeleton to which rhetoric would supply any desired amount of flesh.

This was the ultimate development in

rhetorical education, the final, Neoplatonic

stage, which in time reduced all thought to

impotence. 98

In his discussion with Socrates Gorgias

repeatedly confirmed the definition of a

rhetor as one who addresses an ochlos—the

“multitude” is the audience to whom he

normally appeals in the interest of his

clients. Accordingly the values of rhetoric

are quantitative: How much? and How

many? are the questions it always asks.

Gloria like wealth is a function of size alone: the greater the cheering multitude the

greater the glory and success of the one

cheered. There is no exception to the rule,

for all the fastidious and hypocritical

protests of those scholarly rhetors who

affected to despise the mob. Rhetoric,

according to Augustine, is the art which,

animated by necessity rather than “purity,”

scatters to the populace from its overflowing

bosom (the Roman equivalent of pockets) an

abundance of delights, thus leading them to

comply with his interests. 99 You can get what you want out of people if only you give them

what they want—without question and

without hesitation. The rhetor, says Philo, is the slave of a thousand masters, the public is a whore, and he is her minion and her lapdog.100 “What do you want me to do?” cries Dio Chrysostom to the people of his native

city; “I’ll do it! ”101 In Cicero’s opinion Rutilius was the perfect orator in

background, training, and native endowment,

and yet he was a conspicuous failure

because of one fatal defect: “He could not

sufficiently accommodate himself to popular

taste.” 102 No one who gets into this business has a right to be fastidious: “necesse est aut imiteris aut oderis”—unless you are

prepared to go all the way to please the mob,

you had better avoid it altogether. 103 When an anxious parent asked Antisthenes where

he should educate his son, the philosopher

answered, “If you expect him to spend his

days among the gods make him a

philosopher, but if he expects to live among

people make him a rhetor!” 104

The orator must stoop to conquer, and a

quick and frightening rebuke awaits him if he

does not stoop low enough. For all his

toadying, Dio was banished for being

unsociable, Libanius had to clear himself of the same terrible charge, and Apuleius was

investigated time and again because he was

suspected of being an introvert. 105 Go easy on philosophy, Cicero advises, don’t talk

over people’s heads—they don’t like orators

who make them feel stupid; best keep your

books at home for private leisure. 106 He might have cited the case of Hermodorus,

who was banished from the illustrious city of

Ephesus because he was guilty of excelling

in something: “If he must excel,” they said,

“let him go and excel over somebody

else!” 107 Cicero’s own opinion is that “an orator is pleasanter and more plausible to

listen to” when he doesn’t indulge in a lot of high-brow stuff. “Everything must be

accommodated to the common judgment and

popular intelligence,” for the rhetor sells to everybody. 108 To find out exactly what people wanted was the hardest part of the

rhetor’s work and the secret of his success; it was the canvass or survey, the careful trial-and-error game of empeiria, “to pick out just those things that appeal most to listeners, and not only delight them, but entertain without

ever tiring them.” 109 Once you had that, the rest was easy, simply “to scratch and tickle

the ears of those who want to be tickled,”

taking care never to speak harshly to them. 110

The landslide of vulgarization once

started could not be stopped. Good men

were intimidated and banished from the

cities by mobs who could always count on

finding orators that would never contradict

them, society reserving its richest rewards

for those who could justify, condone, and

confirm its vices. 111 Even a strong-minded emperor who tried to stem the tide could

wreck his cause by refusing to play along

with the show-bred city crowds, and even

risk his person if he dared to talk back to

them.112 The orating bishop who tried to introduce a fancy word or new idea into his

sermon might find an angry congregation

shouting back at him, or even have a riot on

his hands. 113 There was only one thing to do, as Augustine observed: don’t fight the stream

—go with it: vae tibi, flumen moris humani!

Quis resistet tibi? (Woe unto you, stream of human custom. Who can resist you?).114 “For all his intellectuality,” McGiffert writes of

the saint, “he was instinctively a conformist

and could never be quite happy unless the

majority agreed with him. ”115 “What society as a whole believes,” Augustine announces,

“that we also believe, and without an inkling

of doubt, even though there is not the

slightest evidence that it is true.” 116 He would have been as nonplussed as was

Polus, the ardent defender of rhetoric, when

Socrates told him that though he bring all the important people in the world to support his

cause, “I only am left alone and cannot agree, for you do not convince me; you only

produce many false witnesses against me, in

the hope of depriving me of my heritage,

which is the truth. ”117 That is the opposite pole from the rhetorical gospel, that the

difference between true and false, right and

wrong, good and bad, success and failure, is

the difference between twenty and fifty

decibels of applause.

To the pagan as to the Christian orator

no sight is more thrilling, no authority more

compelling, than that of the multitude

assembled in the theater (cf. fig. 17).118 The favorite device of the great rhetor is the

ecstatic peroration in which the whole

human race is depicted as one magnificent

congregation, praising, condemning,

pleading, or acclaiming in a single

thunderous voice. 119 The speaker identified himself completely with his hearers: no

orator can be eloquent without an audience, Cicero insists.120 “Me too” ( in quo et me) might be taken as Augustine’s slogan and the

secret of his success. 121 He frankly recommends a low, vulgar, and amusing style

as the most valuable acquisition of the

Christian orator and wholeheartedly

practices what he preaches in his tasteless,

artificial, profuse, and immensely popular

sermons. 122

Figure 17. The visual arts of the

period recorded the pervasive

influence of rhetoric by its

recognized symbol, the upraised

two fingers of the right hand. On an

ivory panel (A), c. A.D. 400, a Roman judge dictates the law to his

secretaries while acclaimed by two

men below, all three making the

oratorical gesture. It was also used

by masked actors (B), as in

manuscript Terence, c. A.D. 300, as

well as by worshipers of the

Eastern god Sabazios (C), who sits

making the sign on a bronze hand in

the same position, c. A.D. 200-400.

Christian sculptors merely

continued the long tradition when

they depicted Christ delivering the

Sermon on the Mount (D) in this

sarchophagus fragment, c. A.D.

300. The Lord is represented giving

the Divine Law, dressed as a Greek

philosopher, making the gesture

that will later become known as the

benedctio latina.

But rhetoric did more than bow before the storm: it worked hard to create and

intensify it, beginning with the first political speakers who “systematically debauched”

the people for their votes. 123 In the early days, according to Cicero, it was the good

sense of the public that acted as a brake on

the orators: “semper oratorum eloquentiae

moderatrix fuit auditorum prudentia”; and

one of the first reactions to the professional rhetors in Rome was to expel them from the

city. 124 This “prudence of the auditors” had to be broken down, and was: when Galba

tried to appeal to Roman “primitive

inflexibility and excessive strictness” he

only hurt his cause, says Tacitus, “for we

cannot endure the excess of these virtues

nowadays.” 125 The same thing happened among the Greeks, where the first reaction to

the Sophist techniques was one of shock and

alarm, and only an intensive campaign of

debunking established values, confounding commonsense conclusions, and turning on a

vast amount of charm, wit, and synthetic

sincerity succeeded in breaking down the

general sales resistance. But once it was

broken, the talkers, “the yokes of the

empire,” as Ammianus calls them, had it all

their own way. 126 Theirs was the big-city world of late antiquity, a jazz world, hard,

restless, and superficial, suffering from

chronic theatromania and eternally jiving and jumping to the latest hit tunes. 127

Everywhere there is an insistence on the

folksy, the easy, and the commonplace in this

five-and-ten civilization that caters

especially to the tastes of women. 128

This easy-going partiality to the cheap

and low-brow in no way reflected any real

humanity or humility, for lowness of taste

and morals was matched, as many an over-

intellectual rhetor learned to his sorrow, by a

fiercely arrogant insistence on stereotyped uniformity and a quick suspicion of any hint

of independence or individuality. It was the

day of the large urban crowd, the warm-

weather, outdoor Mediterranean crowd,

healthy, excitable, superstitious, sweating,

and jostling at the games and shows.129 It worshiped its fighters, its actors, and its

orators. 130 Encouraged by the state to avoid serious thinking, the crowd became under the

leadership of the experts not revolutionary or radical but stoutly conservative, 131 fond of rough-house but mushily sentimental; in time

they even learned how to exchange

spontaneous tears and laughter for the nicety

and propriety of organized and directed

applause. 132

The insatiable hunger of the people for

entertainment was matched by “an unbridled

passion for the spoken word.” 133 There was

nothing they would not pay for suaviloquentia, “pleasing speech,” the top-selling novelty product of the Second

Sophist that caught on and stuck. The experts

knew exactly what would sell and what

would not; they had it all at their fingertips—

formulae that could get a reaction as quick

and predictable as a knee-jerk; even those

who knew how it was done, could not

escape “the noose of suaviloquentia. " The general public didn’t have a chance—the

rhetors simply get them drunk, says Lucian,

and go to work on them; flesh and blood can

no more resist the impact of a tried and

tested rhetorical assault than it can take a

cool appraising look at the Görgön’s head—

you are paralyzed before you know what hit

you. 134 A properly trained rhetorician can make his audience clay in his hands, helpless

automatons without a mind or will of their

own.135

Rhetoric did not apologize for hitting below the belt. Before an orator can stir an

emotion in other people, the teacher would

explain, he must first feel it in himself, and

“the nature of oratory is such that it moves

the orator more than it does any of his

hearers. ”136 Who, then, could be more sincere than the orator? Who will dare to say

his tears are not real? His profession

requires him to produce real tears. Is rhetoric artificial? they ask, but what could

be more artificial than poetry, prose, or

dramatic composition? If actors can pretend

and imagine without shocking people, why

can’t rhetors? Do not philosophers take

either side of a question for purposes of

discussion—why shouldn’t we?137 The answer is, of course, that of all these

practitioners the orator alone insists that he is not doing what he is doing, namely acting.

As a crowning vindication of their ethics, the

rhetors neatly converted the truism that a good orator must be a good man into the

corollary that rhetorical skill is proof of a

noble character. 138

The effect of this sort of thing on serious

thought and learning can be imagined, but it

does not need to be: the whole history of the

Empire is there to illustrate it and to confirm in every detail all the charges that Plato had with unerring insight brought against rhetoric in the beginning. 139 Hippias, Gorgias, Polus, Prodicus, and the other great Sophists

“achieved wonderful reputations,” Dio

Chrysostom recalls, “and acquired great

wealth in public activities from cities,

dynasts, kings, and private individuals. . . .

They spoke a great deal, but were sadly

lacking in intelligence,” and they confounded

issues and destroyed philosophy.140 It was in their interest to do so, for they confessed that public ignorance was their greatest ally and

that the less an audience knew about a subject the more convincingly an orator

could handle it.141 No one would ever guess, says Cicero with admiration, that his friend

Antony does not know Greek: by his

rhetorical art alone he can give the

impression more perfectly than any real

Hellenist can.142 Isn’t the knowledge of such an art preferable to the piecemeal grubbing

out of harder and less rewarding stuff?

With the introduction of the Second

Sophistic the arts and sciences of the West

entered upon a period of decline from which

they were never to recover. At the same time

the school entered upon a career of

undreamed-of expansion and splendor. As

steadily as civilization sank in the scale the school mounted on high, until the one

reached a peak of enduring glory and

authority at the very moment, in the fifth

century, when the other came to rest at its

final and permanent bathos. The cause of this phenomenon, as Cauer has noted, was the

saturation of the Western mind: there came a

day when the cultural deposit of the past had

become too great for any mind to absorb,

while in the face of what had already been

done, all future creation lost heart. 143 From then on, learning the hard way had become

just too hard, and the creative spirit was left with nothing to create. The only answer was

rhetoric, the wonderful art by which an

ordinary person could master all knowledge

“in his sleep,” and bring forth new and

original creations simply by rearranging the

familiar rhetorical building blocks in any

desired pattern. The very thing that stifled

learning was pure oxygen to the schools of

rhetoric. How easily they took over all the

functions of scholarship may be seen in the

case of the immortal Hermogenes. As a

boywonder (it was an age of praecoces

pueruli [precocious little boys]) he had given exhibitions of his rhetorical skill

before the Emperor at the age of 15; his

sweeping and pretentious rhetoric convinced

the world that he was its greatest thinker, and his writings on all subjects became

compulsory textbooks for generations to

come. 144 Yet his actual contribution to knowledge is exactly nil—he has nothing to

say. As the brain that feels for the whole

body is incapable of feeling itself or what is happening to it, so the antique school seems

utterly incapable of judging of its own

ineptness. The actual productions of the

world’s most illustrious professors for

centuries on end are incredibly imbecile; in

reading them we blush for the authors, yet

they in perpetrating these childish horrors

are joyfully exhibitionistic of their very

worst traits, totally unaware of what a

shocking spectacle they make. 145 Rhetoric,

like Mephistopheles, gave them success but took away their brains in exchange.

By the fifth century the learning and arts

of the West present a horrible spectacle. As

rhetoric had broken the back of philosophy

by systematic sabotage and absorption, so

one by one it had occupied every field in

which money and fame could be earned.

Again it was Plato who had pointed out that

it was in its nature to do just that. Others

have told the story on which we need not

linger here; the poetry utterly devoid of life, inanely and permanently preoccupied with

those abortive and fantastic devices so

admired in the schools: computistic rhythms,

acrostics, centos, picture poetry, neoteric

verse, and the rest; the scientific writings

reduced to mere displays of conventional

forms of expression and studied obscurity;

history and scholarship confined to

translations, commentaries, summas, and

epitomes; everywhere the strangely monotonous and repetitious striving to be

stunningly different and impeccably

respectable at the same time, to pile a

humdrum Pelion on a conventional Ossa in

violent and cumulative attempts to achieve

the novel and sensational. 146

It is no paradox that the gaudiest

excesses of rhetoric have a familiar ring.

The rhetorician’s business is to make an

irresistible impression immediately on large numbers of people: his message must be

grasped and his persuasion succeed on the

first hearing—cool deliberation and the

gathering of facts would be fatal to his

profession. 147 He has no choice but to “pour it on”— copia is Cicero’s favorite word.

With satiation comes boredom—there must

be no satiation.148 Christianity gives rhetoric a new lease on life, according to Augustine,

by providing the sore-pressed orator with a

materia grandis in which exaggeration is impossible; from here on the orator can pour

out Niagaras of superlatives and still not

begin to do justice to an arsenal of absolutes.

Moreover, it brings a new spice to the jaded

appetites and yet requires nothing new either

of the speaker or the hearer, for the central

theme is God, the one theme most familiar to

the largest number of people: accordingly,

one never has to tell his hearers anything

they do not know already.149 The matter, manner, and vocabulary of the Christian

sermon were borrowed whole-cloth from the

panegyric.150 Enormous economy of mental effort was achieved by insisting on rigid

stereotypes in the rhetor’s techniques. When

rhetoric became Christian, according to

Norden, it bade a last farewell to ideas and

concerned itself henceforth “only with the

forms in which the idea had been clothed in

the Hellenistic world. ”151 Augustine

compares the words of the pagan orators to precious ornamental vases which he values

most highly—“only the wine of error they

contain displeases me.” The old rhetoric

interested him only as an empty jar, devoid

of content; as such he treasured it above all

else. 152

From the second century on the chief

characteristic of every branch of science and

art is “the inability to create new

compositions.” 153 The stereotype had abolished the need of that: “things that bad

poets instinctively love to fashion,” are the

permanent legacy of rhetoric to literature.

Instead, everywhere we meet with the mania

for collecting, for cataloguing, for the

pointless quiz, the irrelevant “believe it or

not,” the literary and historical tags that lead nowhere, the passion for merely stating

information. Strangely enough, real learning

was ignored, even as a means of making an

impression, and Ammianus can report in the greatest days of the schools that the libraries are shut up like tombs. 154 In the rhetorical education sponsored by Augustine, Marrou

perceives “un écho, une influence du

fléchissement général des études, de cet

abaissement du niveau général de la

civilisation, qui déjà tout autour d’Augustin, annonce les temps barbares” (an echo, the

effect of a widespread decline in education,

of a lowering in the general level of culture, all around Augustine, which heralds the

onset of the barbarian age). 155 As ever the rhetoricians themselves continued to protest

against the scandalous artificiality and

insincerity of their art—in the most artificial and rhetorical terms!156

Some years ago it became fashionable

in informed circles to ascribe the emergence

of the Medieval mind to a process of

orientalization. Now while it is true that the

typically rhetorical is also the typically Oriental and that the Rhetoric which

conquered the Western World was “the thing

that came from Asia, ”157 what happened was not a yielding to foreign pressure so much as

the running down of institutions to a point

where they reach a dead level to which the

East had sunk many centuries before and to

which it had become perfectly adapted. With

the triumph of rhetoric the West joins the

fraternity of fallen civilizations that live a common, if not a congenial, life and share a

common mood. The Orient did not force

itself on the West but simply moved into a

vacuum. 158

Turning to the East we find that rhetoric

has everywhere done its work and run its

course in past ages, and so rules with

uniform and undisputed sway from aeon to

aeon. All that reaches us from the Pyramid

Age of Egypt is a feeble and moralizing

literature that has survived only because it was perpetuated and copied in the

schools. 159 The papyri of the Old Kingdom already display the fatal rhetorical passion

for saying the same thing in as many different ways as possible, and by the Tenth Dynasty

all effort at creation seems to have ceased,

the writings of the time consisting solely of

endless learned citations from earlier

writings. The characteristically Egyptian

admonitions, the seboyet literature, laments, and letters are simply school pieces to serve

as standards of form. 160 Always it is the sesh, the man trained in words, who sets the tone; he it is “by whose speech others are

pleased,” “who is rescued from the mouth of

the vulgar and praised in the mouth of

important people”; he is the one “who will

never go hungry,” who will get ahead at

court, who is assured of an easy and

important career because he knows how to

speak pleasingly and write by the book.161

Insincerity and smugness mark the smooth,

copious, trite flow of phrases—“glatter

Phrasenschwulst” (pure bombast), Kees

calls it—that means success in public and

private life. 162 “Style soon outlived its first freshness, and gave way to an artificiality

and bombast which submerge the content.” 163

The famous Eloquent Peasant belongs right

in our own Middle Ages with its exhausting

parallels and wearisome display of

rhetorical imagery.164 From the Middle Kingdom on, according to Gardiner, “a

florid and metaphorical style” was

perpetuated as the “tales and semi-didactic

treatises . . . were copied and recopied in the schools.” 165 Finally with the Ramessid period we reach the mood commonly

described as “typically Oriental,” in which

content vanishes and only spice, “the exotic

bloom of rhetoric,” remains, while restraint

and reason are thrown to the winds.166 The next step is Alexandria, where the tradition

continues without a break and where Dio

Chrysostom found the city in his day given

over body and soul to the rhetors. 167

It is the same with the Babylonians. The

student who learns the rules becomes an

important official, and among his fellows

“he shineth like the day.” 168 From first to last the school is supreme, with the result that

“no important addition appears to have been

made in nearly two millenniums” to any

branch of knowledge.169 “The period of nearly 3,000 years through which the

monuments carry us,” writes Weber, “shows

in all essentials an unvarying picture of

intellectual life.” 170 The vast heaps of tablets yield nothing but an endless mechanical

repetition of the same stock stories and

figures; we look in vain for any sign of

evolution in this sort of thing, the experts inform us—from century to century the

precious game goes on: a poem on the 360

uses of the palm, a debate between summer

and winter, a servant and a master, the palm

and the tamarisk, between two rival cities, a

tireless preoccupation with mere words,

with bizarre and studied archaisms, the

incredibly industrious but sloppy and

inaccurate rehashing of the same materials

with never a hint of originality or

remorse.171 The labors of the Babylonian mind as described by Professor Meissner

are hardly to be distinguished from those of

our own Middle Ages as Professor Raby

describes them; they bear the same familiar

stamp, the indelible stamp of rhetoric.

The literature of the Arabs presents the

same appalling picture. Spengler’s

magischer Geist is but the thrall of rhetoric.

From the beginning “a few mediocre

textbooks completely ruled the schools for centuries on end, ”172 and the schools ruled everything else with their maxim that correct

speech is more important than correct

thought. 173 A thoroughly hackneyed panegyric to the prophet in which he

displayed fifty-one rhetorical figures made

al-Ḥilli the greatest man in Baghdad, exactly

as a like panegyric to the Emperor had made

Sidonius the greatest man in Rome six

centuries before.174 By the eleventh century the schools had brought the intellectual life

of Islam to a complete standstill; the culamā’

could think of nothing to do but to be

“continually rearranging and reordering the

materials at hand into new and meaningless

systems.” 175 Heirs of the Sophist tradition through Edessa and Alexandria, the Arabs

went the inevitable way of the rhetoric

school and by the thirteenth century had

reached familiar ground: mathematics

confined (as Seneca would have it) to the reckoning of inheritances, astronomy to the

calculating of business and religious

engagements, medicine to the study of

astrology, and philosophy and theology to

fussy and pointless commentaries. 176 Top-notch scholars, utterly at a loss for ideas,

spent their days like the Sophists of old

traveling from university to university and

from mosque to mosque to give public

display to their wit and eloquence, or

attending conventions and busily writing up

their reports.177 As in rhetorical schools in general, the most meticulous hair- splitting

goes hand in hand with the most wild and

undisciplined phantasy, but always the first

prize goes to the Flowers of Eloquence. 178

The esthetic judgment of the schools “never

pays any attention to a composition as a

whole, but seeks poetic beauty only and

always in the isolated verse.” 179 The story of

Kalila and Dimna, the oldest Arabic prose work and to this day the most popular school

text in the East, is simply a sequel to the

Vitae Sophistarum, recounting the careers of two foxy rhetors who traveled about from

court to court as teachers of political virtue and tutors to princes; a good deal of the text is taken up with their typically Sophistic and thoroughly rhetorical discourses on how to

succeed in the world. Their slogan is, li-

kulli kalamatin jawāban, “for every

question there is an answer,” the maxim,

illustrated in so many Oriental tales, that a

ready tongue is equal to any emergency.180

But if Hajji Baba is a faithful

reincarnation of the clever Sophist, his type

is far older than Gorgias or even wily

Odysseus—it is the nominal offspring of

civilizations in collapse. 181 There is no geographical affinity between this sort of

thing and the soil of the East. The mind of

late antiquity was neither characteristically Eastern nor Western but simply servile, 182

the product of a world without moral

foundations. 183 As Western civilization burnt out, it came to look more and more like other

burnt-out civilizations—exactly as they had

visited Thebes-on-the-Nile in the fifth

century B.C., the scholars of the fifth century A.D. visited Athens to enjoy its glamor and

prestige—and the resemblance naturally

facilitated all sorts of borrowings and

exchanges. 184 However different the original structures may have been, one pile of ashes

looks much like another. The most alarming

aspect of such ash-heaps is their

indestructibility—there is nothing left to

destroy, and so the rhetorical tradition is as enduring as it is uniform. When all the arts

and sciences have reached the Dead Sea of

Rhetoric they simply stay there forever.

The much-debated “natural eloquence”

of the Bedouins raises the question to what degree the high-flown, rhetorical, and

artificial style of various “barbaric” nations (e.g., the Norse kenning) is the result of contact with the decadent Greco-Roman

civilization and to what degree rhetoric itself is “naturally barbaric.” Whatever the

answer, there is no question but that the

barbarians recognized in the rhetoric of the

schools an idiom very near to their own

minds and hearts. The faults of bad rhetors, it was often noted, are conspicuously those of

barbarian rhetors. If barbarians were most

easily impressed by rhetoric, so were

women, children, and slaves. In East and

West it was the school, the rhetoric school of late antiquity, that won over the barbarians to another culture.185 No matter how passionately they championed this or that

religion—pagan, Catholic, Arian, Moslem—

the kings of the tribes as one man went down

on their knees in common devotion to the learning of the schools and took to

composing epigrams and inditing hollow

epistles in the starry-eyed conviction that

that was civilization. If the vices of

barbarian oratory were not actually acquired

from the schoolmen, they were certainly

confirmed and perpetuated by them.186

Simplifying, shortening, and spicing—

the trade secrets of the ancient rhetor’s as of the modern journalist’s success—do have

absolute limits, and when these are reached

the rhetorical process has done its work. The

end product is something once thought to be

typically Oriental—the shadow theater of

comic book. In the typical Oriental romance

the labor of reading is supplanted by the

efforts of the graphic storyteller, whose

American counterpart is a pen-and-ink artist

capable, like his Eastern colleague, of mass-

producing amazingly vivid illustrations at

great speed. The skill of both these craftsmen is readily explained by the fact that they are simply drawing the same pictures over and

over again. The story is told in brief,

repetitive episodes, all strangely alike and

all richly spiced with sex and gore. A

wanton and meaningless procession of

extravagant images passes before us,

exaggerated to the point of insanity yet

hackneyed to the limit of dullness. In the old familiar recital of dangers by land, sea, and

air we meet the same incredible monsters

again and again, the same men of superhuman

strength and women of sinister beauty, and

especially are we regaled by the same

routine declamations on the cruelty of life in general and the present situation in

particular, with particular attention to the

tribulations of parted lovers. Mind is

supplanted by magic, the world becomes an

uncensored daydream full of wonderful

transformations and melodramatic adventures. 187 The rhetoric that fostered this type of thinking ends up as “a wild jumble of

words [that] . . . aims at dramatic vividness

and merely succeeds in revealing his [the

orator’s] own mental nullity.” The world as

it passed from ancient to medieval times

“was in fact suffering from a sort of fatty

degeneration of the intellect,” expressed in

nothing more clearly than “the gush and

slobber” of its rhetoric. 188

Pointing out the dangers and defects of

rhetoric does not change the habits of

rhetoricians. The young Hippocrates, in the

beginning of the Protagoras, blushes when he admits to Socrates that he is taking up

rhetoric—but that does not change his plans.

Like the passions and appetites it feeds on,

rhetoric is one of the great constants in

human history. Because it is a constant,

nothing can tell us better the direction in

which a civilization is moving or how far it is along the way. Like the residue of certain

radioactive substances, rhetoric, leaving an

unmistakable mark on all that it touches, may

yet prove to be the surest guide to the history of our own times.

Notes

This article was originally published

in Western Speech 20/2 ( Spring 1956): 57-82.

Footnotes

^1. Cicero, De Oratore I, 20.

^2. Ibid., I, 21.

^3. Ibid., I, 23; cf. I, 14-15.

^4. Quintilian, De Institutione Oratoria II, 15, quoting among others Isocrates’ famous

definition, the peithous dēmiourgon, “maker or deviser of persuasion.”

^5. Corax is cited by Aristotle, The “Art” of Rhetoric II, 24, 11; Dio Chrysostom,

Discourses XXXV, 7; Augustine, Principia Rhetorices, in appendix to PL 32:1441.

^6. Cicero, De Oratore I, 2, 10-11; III, 44, 174; XX, 68.

^7. Wilhelm Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur (Munich: Beck,

1940), 1:1:50-57.

^8. Gustave Combès, Saint Augustin et la culture classique (Paris: Plon, 1927), 126.

^9. “Prolegomena,” Panathenaic Oration, in Wilhelm Dindorf, ed., Aristides, 3 vols.

(Leipzig: Weidmann, 1829), 3:737.

^10. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 480.

^11. Ibid., 482.

^12. Ibid., 483; Plato, Gorgias.

^13. According to Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers VIII, 57.

^14. His verses on the subject are quoted by Sextus Empiricus, Against the Professors

VII, 123-24 (— Against the Logicians I, 123-34) and are given in Heinrich Ritter and

Ludwig Preller, Historia Philosophiae Graecae, 10th ed. (Gotha: Klotz, 1934), 128-29.

^15. Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers VIII, 54 and 77, and Ritter and Preller, Historia Philosophia Graecae, 126.

^16. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 482-83.

^17. Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur, 1:1:77-78.

^18. Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers IX, 50-52.

^19. Ibid., IX, 51.

^20. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 511; 507.

For the best general treatment, see Wilhelm

von Christ, Geschichte der griechischen

Litteratur bis auf die Zeit Justiniens,

revised by Schmid and Stählin, 2 vols., 6th

ed. (Munich: Beck, 1924), 2:682-92.

^21. Von Christ, Geschichte der griechischen Litteratur, 2:690.

^22. Ibid., 2:691.

^23. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 485, 487;

Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XLIX, 6-15.

Barkowski, “Sieben Weise” in RE 2:2:2242-62, hardly does justice to the theme, to

which a better introduction is Philostratus,

Life of Apollonius of Tyana, or the speeches of Dio Chrysostom.

^24. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 487-90.

The endless ramifications of the theme of

the Seven Wise Men carry one all over the

East and back to very early times: it was an

ancient and established concept that the

Greeks adopted as a mainstay of their own

social order: “The sixth century, the most

critical period in the mental development of

the Greeks, came to be known afterwards as

the age of the Seven Sages.” Thus see J. B.

Bury, A History of Greece to the Death of

Alexander the Great (London: Macmillan, 1929), 321.

^25. Barkowski, “Sieben Weise,” in RE 2:2:2262, could have made a much stronger case.

^26. Most of the thirty-three Sophists in Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists, engage in these activities: his Apollonius engages in all

of them. See below, n. 27.

^27. Lucian, Herodotus 1-3; Isocrates, Panathanaicus; Apuleius, Florida 3; Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 493, for a few illustrations. The first Roman orators

were “ambassadors sent to kings and nations

by the Roman people to represent our

republic,” being chosen for their skill as

speakers, according to Festus, s.v. Oratores.

^28. The picture is drawn from Dio, Libanius, Eunapius, the Roman Panegyrists,

Philostratus, Philo, etc. Apuleius praises the people who have come to hear him that “if

there is to be a mime you will laugh; if a

tightrope-walker you will tremble . . . if a

comedian applaud . . . if a philospher learn,”

Apuleius, Florida 5.

^29. Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XXXII, 5.

^30. Ibid., XXX, 3 and 19; XIII, 11.

^31. Ibid., XII, 14-15.

^32. The same combination was the secret of Euripides’ matchless success. Professor

Jaeger sees in Euripides “the two Janus

faces of Sophistry.” See Werner W. Jaeger, Paideia: The Ideas of Greek Culture, tr.

Gilbert Highet, 3 vols. (New York: Oxford

University Press, 1945), 1:329.

^33. Eduard Norden, ed., Die antike Kunstprosa, 2 vols. (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche

Buchgesellschaft, 1898), 2:508; cf.

Epictetus, IV, 8.

^34. Cicero, De Oratore I, 34, 158; cf. II, 7, 30:

“oratoris autem omnis actio opinionibus, non

scientia continentur” (the activity of the

orator has to do with opinion, not

knowledge). On doxa, Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur, 3:38, n. 7.

^35. Cicero, Brutus XI, 22.

^36. Quintilian, De Institutione Oratoria II, 15, 22.

^37. Clement of Alexandria, Stromatum (Stromata) 8, in PG 9:557-602; cf. Clement of Alexandria, Paedagogus I, 3, in PG

8:260; I, 10, in PG 8:356.

^38. “Summa autem laus eloquentiae est amplificare rem oranando.” The orator seeks

what is “ad exaggerandam et amplificandam orationem accomodatum.” Cicero, De

Oratore III, 26-27.

^39. Plato, Phaedrus 267A.

^40. Gellius, Noctes Atticae (Attic Nights) I, 6, contrasting the integrity of Metellus with this commonly held idea of rhetoric.

^41. Aristotle, The “Art” of Rhetoric I, 1, 13; Augustine, De Doctrina Christiana (On

Christian Doctrine) II, 36: “non est facultas ipsa culpabilis, sed ea male utentium

perversitas” (it is not the ability itself that is to be blamed but the perversity of those who

put it to bad use).

^42. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 491.

^43. Von Christ, Geschichte der griechischen Litteratur, 2:1006-7.

^44. Gellius, Attic Nights I, 6.

^45. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 499.

^46. Augustine, Epistolae (Epistles) XVII, 1, in PL 33:83; “Sed me ipse cohibeo, ne a te rhetorice potius quam veridice agere

existimer.”

^47. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2:623-24; Erwin Rohde, Der griechische Roman und seine

Vorläufer (Leipzig: Breitkopf and Härtel, 1914), 348.

^48. Cicero, Pro Cluentio LI, 142; cf. Pliny the Younger’s insistence that his famous

Panegyric to Trajan is a sincere, not a rhetorical discourse, Pliny, Panegyric 54

and 72-74.

^49. “Nihil iratum habet, nihil invidum, nihil atrox, nihil miserabile, nihil astatum; casta

verecunda virgo incorrupta quodam modo”;

Cicero, Orator XIX, 64.

^50. Quintilian, De Institutione Oratoria XII, 1, 1 and 27-45; II, 15, 20.

^51. Cicero, Orator I, 3; IV, 14; V, 17; Cicero, De Oratore I, 2-5; 7; 18; and 50; Cicero, Brutus VI, 23 and 25; Quintilian, De Institutione Oratoria XII.

^52. Cicero, De Oratore I, 6 and 26-28; III, 22

and 84.

^53. Ibid., and n. 50 above.

^54. Petronius, Satyricon 1-4; in Lucian,

Nigrinus, a common theme of satire.

Tacitus, Dialogus 30.

^55. Theodor Mommsen, “Boden-und Geldwirthschaft der römischen Kaiserzeit,”

Gesammelte Schriften, 8 vols., 2d ed.

(Berlin: Weidmann, 1965), 5:617.

^56. Rohde, Der griechische Roman, 315.

^57. Cicero, De Oratore II, 38, 160. Quintilian, De Institutione Oratoria XII, 1, 35, calls him an unjust man because he spoke on

succeeding days and with equal facility both

for and against Justice.

^58. Lucian, Harmodes.

^59. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 506.

^60. Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur, 3:78.

^61. Cicero, De Oratore II, 4.

^62. Seneca, Controversiae II, preface 3.

^63. Seneca, Epistulae LXXXVIII, 4; 10; 20; and 39.

^64. Seneca, Controversiae IX, preface 1.

^65. Cicero, Pro Archia Poeta XI, 28; XII, 30.

^66. Ibid., XI, 26.

^67. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 511 (on Nicetas in Smyrna); Libanius, Oration 40, is comfort for a friend who failed to be

applauded in the streets. Cicero’s anxious

attention to the volume and direction of

applause when he entered the theater, as

depicted in the letters, is typical.

^68. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 499.

^69. Taking the form of gratia, opes, and dignatis, respectively, Cicero, De Oratore I, 4, 15.

^70. John Bury, History of the Later Roman Empire, 2 vols. (London: Macmillan, 1923), 1:47; Rohde, Der griechische Roman, 324.

^71. Rohde, Der griechische Roman, 310, 362; Martin Schanz, Geschichte der römischen

Literatur, 4 vols. (Munich: Beck, 1914), 4:1:546-47.

^72. Philo, On the Special Laws II, 20.

^73. Cicero, De Oratore I, 8, 34.

^74. Libanius, Epistulae 175.

^75. Lucian, Nigrinus 14-15.

^76. Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XLIII, 6; cf.

Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 497.

^77. Augustine, Confessiones (Confessions) IV, 2, in PL 32:693.

^78. Quintilian, De Institutione Oratoria XII, 4.

^79. Cicero, De Oratore II, 44, 187. That orator was “made” who could speak fluently and

ingeniously on any and all subjects: “qui de

omnibus rebus possit varie copioseque

dicere,” ibid., I, 13, 59.

^80. Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XXXII, 12; XLIII, 6; Lucian, The Dead Come to Life

35. The most vivid account of the

depredations of these people is found in the

letters of St. Basil.

^81. Isocrates, Panathenaicus 95; cf. Rohde, Der griechische Roman, 348-49.

^82. Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur, 3:37: the attitude was both unsocial and irreligious.

^83. Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 501-2; a like case was Antiphon’s, in ibid., 498.

^84. Plato, Gorgias 457B. The case of Hermodes the Sophist and Pausanias the assassin is

discussed by A. Thysius, Valerius Maximus (Leiden: Hackium, 1670), I, 8, 2, 9, p. 122,

n. 3.

^85. Lucian, Philosophies for Sale 9.

^86. Isocrates, Nicocles 1. The same frank confession of self-interest may be found in

Cicero, Epistulae ad Familiares III, 10, 9; Augustine, De Disciplina Christiana 11-12, in PL 40:675-76.

^87. Finely expressed in John Chrysostom’s harangue against marriage, De Virginitate

60-74, in PG 48:580-87; celibacy is easier, less complicated, does not raise so many

problems, and so forth. “It is pleasanter to

walk than to ride a mule.”

^88. Apuleius, Florida 18.

^89. Quintilian, De Institutione Oratoria II, 16, 1-10, illustrates this strikingly when he

compares the bad uses of rhetoric to the

good: the former are all lively and profitable, the latter all stuffy and ornamental, i.e.,

rhetoric gives courage to mighty armies,

guides great cities, teaches moral precepts,

and sets man apart from the beast.

^90. Plato, Gorgias 464D-E.

^91. They even paid students to come to them, Libanius, Oration I, 13; 15; 61 and 76; cf. I, 3 and 25-30.

^92. Lucian, The Dream; Lucian, Nigrinus. On the pampering of students with easy courses,

see Albertus Müller, “Studentenleben im 4.

Jahrhundert nach Christus,” Philologus 69

(1910): 303-6.

^93. Cicero, De Oratore II, 28, 124.

^94. Augustine, Confessions I, 10, in PL 32:668; Augustine, De Utilitate Credendi ad

Honoratum VII, 16, in PL 42:76. For an excellent discussion, Franz X. Eggersdorfer,

Der heilige Augustinus als Pädagoge und

seine Bedeutung für die Geschichte der

Bildung (Freiburg im Breisgau: Herder, 1907), 10-13. Cf. Dio Chrysostom,

Discourses XXXV, 8.

^95. “Statim sapiunt, statim sciunt omnia, neminem verentur, imitantur neminem atque

ipsi sibi exempla sint,” Pliny, Epistulae VIII,

23. The same in Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XXXIII, 22. Cicero, De Oratore I, 4, 14, says that every fame-hungry kid in

Rome insists on becoming an orator; cf.

Augustine, Confessions I, 17-18, in PL

32:673-74; Cicero, Letters to His Friends I, 4-5.

^96. Petronius, Satyricon 1-4.

^97. Proclus, Chrestomathia, ed. Hiller, 16, cited in Fritz Schemmel, “Die Hochschule von

Athen im IV. und V. Jahrhundert, P. Ch. N,”

Neue Jahrbücher für das klassische

Altertum, Geschichte und deutsche

Literatur und für Pädagogik 22 (1908): 507-8.

^98. Ibid., 512. Rohde, Der griechische Roman, 387, says rhetoric ended up in the

“trunkenen Taumel neuplatonischer

Phantastik” (drunken frenzy of neo-Platonic

fantasy).

^99. Augustine, De Ordine II, 13, in PL 32:1013.

^100. Philo, On Joseph XIII, 64; XIV, 67; cf. XII, 35 and 59.

^101. Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XLVII, 19.

^102. Cicero, Brutus XXX, 114.

^103. Seneca, Epistulae Morales VII, 7.

^104. Stobaeus, Eclogae (Eclogues) II, 31, 76, cited by Ritter and Preller, Historia

Philosophiae Graecae, 222.

^105. Libanius, Oration 2-3; 41; 63-64; Apuleius, Apologia 6 and 9.

^106. Cicero, De Oratore I, 51, 221; cf. I, 52.

^107. Heracleitus, in Hermann Diels, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 3 vols. (Berlin:

Weidmann, 1956), 1:178, no. 121; cf.

Cicero, Brutus XXII, 84: “Sed est mos

hominum, ut nolint eundem pluribus rebus

excellere” (but it is typical of human nature

not to concede that the same person can

excel in several fields).

^108. Cicero, De Oratore II, 36; and II, 31, 136; XLI, 177; Cicero, Orator XXXIII, 117-18.

^109. Cicero, De Oratore III, 25, 97-98; on trial and error, III, 25, 98; III, 26, 103.

^110. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata I, 3, in PG

8:712; cf. Augustine, Epistles I, 22, in PL

33:90-94. The actual operation of rhetorical technique is extremely easy, according to

Cicero, De Oratore III, 45, 176-it is the

most pliable of tools.

^111. Thus Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XXXII, 6-13; 18-20; and 31.

^112. Julian, Misopogon, is the classic illustration, but Constantius and even Constantine had

the problem on their hands, as we see from

the letters of Lucifer of Caliaris and

Eusebius, Vita Constantini (Life of

Constantine). Cf. Ammianus Marcellinus, XVII, 9, 1-7. The Emperor was expected to

declaim and be acclaimed in the strictly

conventional manner of the rhetorical

schools, for which see Edmond Saglio,

“Acclamatio,” in Charles V. Daremberg and

Edmond Saglio, Dictionnaire des antiquités grecques et romaines, 6 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1877-1919), 1:20, and Johann

Schmidt, “Acclamatio,” in RE 1:148.

^113. Sozomen, Historia Ecclesiastica (Ecclesiastical History) I, 11, in PG

67:885-89; Theophanes, Chronographia,

anno 437. We have a great many notes on this and related subjects, but it is hard to

believe that the reader wishes to see them.

^114. Augustine, Confessions I, 16, in PL 32:672-73, speaking expressly of the rhetorical

schools.

^115. Arthur C. McGiffert, A History of Christian Thought, 2 vols. (New York: Scribner, 1932-33), 2:112; cf. 114.

^116. Augustine, De Utilitate Credendi ad Honoratum 12, in PL 42:84; cf. Augustine, Contra Donatistas (Against the Donatists) XII, 31-33, in PL 43:413-16.

^117. Plato, Gorgias 471D-472A.

^118. Etienne Gilson, Introduction a l’étude de Saint Augustin (Paris: 1929), 220-21;

Augustine, On Christian Doctrine I, 29-30, in PL 34:30-32. For some interesting

examples, cf. Dio Chrysostom, Discourses

XXXII, 4; Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews XIX, 8, 2; Chronicon Paschale, 297, in PG

92:684-85.

^119. The rhetorical panorama is best represented

by the Panegyrics, culminating in Dante, Paradiso. See Hugh Nibley, “Hierocentric State,” Western Political Quarterly 4/2

(1951): 226-53; reprinted in this volume,

pages 99-147.

^120. Cicero, De Oratore II, 83, 338: “Orator sine multitudine audiente eloquens esse non

possit.” Quintilian, De Institutione Oratoria I, 9, believes that even the degrading moral

atmosphere of the rhetorical schools is out-

balanced by the crowded and busy

environment they provide, so necessary to

the student of rhetoric.

^121. Augustine, Confessions XI, 2, in PL

32:809-11. “Steeped to the lips in vulgarity”

is Professor Coulton’s apt phrase.

^122. Augustine, De Cathechizandis Rudibus 2, in PL 40:311-12; ibid., 6, in PL 40:317; cf.

Augustine, De Civitate Dei (The City of

God) IV, 31; Augustine, Epistles 125, in PL

33:473-76; 126; cf. PL 33:476-83; Frederick J. E. Raby, A History of Secular Latin

Poetry in the Middle Ages, 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1934), 1:48-49. Norden, Antike

Kunstprosa, 2:623.

^123. Charles Merivale, History of the Romans under the Empire, 7 vols. (London:

Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans,

1852), 1:42.

^124. Cicero, Orator VIII, 24; the law is quoted in Gellius, Attic Nights XV, 11; it is against both rhetors and philosophers, who were of

course confounded.

^125. Tacitus, Histories I, 18.

^126. Ammianus Marcellinus, XXX, 4.

Anonymous, Breves Enarrationes

Chronographicae I, in Immanuel Bekker, ed. (Bonn: Weber, 1843), 184-85, says the

Sophists were everywhere expected to

criticize and tear down everything; cf.

Thysius, Valerius Maximus I, 8, 2, 8.

^127. Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XXXII, 44; 48; 58-62; and 69-70; Philo, On Husbandry

7-8; Jerome, Epistolae (Epistle) XXII, 10, in PL 22:400; Ad Eustochium 13; Pliny, Natural History X, 43; Augustine, De Cathechizandis Rudibus 16, in PL 40:328-

30: the whole desire of the people is

“gaudere et requiescere in theatris atque

spectaculis” (to relax and enjoy themselves

at the theaters and games).

^128. Cicero, De Officiis II, 16, 56-57; Dio Chrysostom, Discourses XXXII, 9.

^129. Seneca, De Ira III, 6; Apuleius, De Mundo 35; Samuel Dill, Roman Society from Nero

to Marcus Aurelius (New York: World,

1911), 232-50.

^130. For a recent treatment, Eleanor Clark, Rome and a Villa (New York: Doubleday, 1952), 103-4.

^131. For some examples, Dio Chrysostom, Roman History LIV, 17; Philo, On

Drunkenness 198; Philo, De Monarchia, in On the Special Laws I, 8; Corippus, De Laudibus Iustini Augusti Minoris II, 245-55, in Merabandes et Corippus, ed.

Immanuel Bekker (Bonn: Weber, 1836);

Cassiodorus, Variae XII, 11, in PL 69:362-63; Augustine, De Utilitate Jejunii 11, in PL 40:716; Steven Runciman, Byzantine Civilization (London: Arnold, 1966), 20;

Norman H. Baynes, “Byzantine

Civilization,” History n.s. 10 (1926): 294:

“It was precisely when you were strongest,

when you were most alive, that you were

most rigorously conservative.”

^132. The extinction of laughter is a striking phenomenon: Schmid, Geschichte der

griechischen Literatur, 1:1:17, n. 3; cf.

Runciman, Byzantine Civilization, 219-20; the permanent mood because one of

“fickleness . . . bitterness, and uncharitable cynicism. . . . It was not human life but

human nature that they rated too low.”

William G. Holmes, The Age of Justinian

and Theodora, 2 vols., 2d ed. (London: Bell, 1912), 1:86; Commodian,

Instructiones I, 26, in PL 5:220-21; Salvian, De Gubernationi Dei VII, 1 (on hollow

laughter). The mob was shocked by the

informal behavior of Antiochus; Athenaeus,

Deipnosophists V, 193-97. Directed

applause is often mentioned; Joannes

Malalas, Chronographia, XIV, 370-71, ed.

Ludwig Dindorf (Bonn: Weber, 1831), also

in PG 97:552; Corippus, Justin I, 345-46, 358; Anonymous, Breves Enarrationes

Chronographicae 171; cf. Acts 19:34.

^133. Raby, History of Secular Latin Poetry, 1:92.

^134. Lucian, Nigrinus 5-6; Dio Chrysostom, Discourses LXVI, 21 (the Gordon’s head); Philo, On Drunkenness 198. “Noose of

suaviloquentia” is Augustine’s expression, Augustine, Confessions V, 3, in PL 32:707-8, though he advises that “dictionis suavitas

pro ratione argumenti procuranda est”

(smoothness of delivery is to be preferred to

force of argument), in On Christian

Doctrine IV, 14, in PL 34:101.

^135. Augustine, On Christian Doctrine 4, in PL

34:89-122, passim; see Combès, Saint

Augustin et la culture classique, 54-55.

^136. Cicero, De Oratore II, 45, 189-90; cf. II, 46, 191.

^137. Ibid., II, 46, 193-94; II, 47, 196; II, 48; and II, 51; I, 62, 262-65.

^138. Cicero, Brutus VII, 27; this is of a piece

with the observation that an orator should be honest because that makes it easier for him

to work on people, Quintilian, De

Institutione Oratoria XII.

^139. “A period of stagnation set in, tending gradually towards settled apathy and

indifference to all purposive effort.” By the

third century, “an aimless abandonment to

pleasure became the distinctive mark of the

age,” thus Holmes, Age of Justinian and

Theodora, 2:558-59.

^140. Dio Chrysostom, Discourses LIV, 1; XXXIV, 31.

^141. Plato, Gorgias 459.

^142. Cicero, De Oratore II, 14, 59; cf. Lucian, Nigrinus 17.

^143. Friedrich Cauer, “Die Stellung der arbeitenden Klassen in Hellas und Rom,”

Neue Jahrbücher für das klassische

Altertum, Geschichte und deutsche

Literatur und fur Pädagogik 3 (1899): 700-702.

^144. Von Christ, Geschichte der griechischen

Litteratur, 2:929-31.

^145. Schanz, Geschichte der römischen Literatur, 4:1:501-8, 514, 516-50; cf.

Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2:643; by the middle of the fifth century “die absolute

Geschmacklosigkeit” (absolute tastelessness)

was achieved, ibid., 652. The “new

mentality . . . was . . . not only indifferent but hostile to the intellectual achievements of the higher classes,” says Michael

Rostovzeff, Social and Economic History

of the Roman Empire, 2d ed. (Oxford:

Clarendon, 1957), 533-34. Guglielmo

Ferrero, Characters and Events of Roman

History (New York: Putnam, 1909), 227:

“The picture of the Empire, so brilliant from

the economic standpoint, is much less so

from the intellectual: here we touch its great weakness.”

^146. Schanz, Geschichte der römischen Literatur, 3:238-44. Klaus Dockhorn, Die Rhetorik als Quelle des vorromantischen

Irrationalismus in der Literatur-und

Geistegeschichte. Nachrichten der

Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen.

Philologisch-historische Klasse (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1949).

^147. See the discussion by H. W. Garrod, The Oxford Book of Latin Verse (Oxford:

Clarendon, 1944), xxxiv-xxxvii. Plato,

Gorgias 455.

^148. “It was of the essence of the rhetorical method from Ovid onward to treat of a

given theme in detail until there was no more

left to be said,” thus Raby, History of

Secular Latin Poetry, 1:343.

^149. Augustine, On Christian Doctrine IV, 19, in PL 34:106-7.

^150. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2:466; Schanz, Geschichte der römischen Literatur 4:507-11; Johann Zellinger, “Der Beifall in der

altchristlichen Predigt,” in Festgabe Alois Knopfler (Freiburg im Breisgau: Herder, 1917), 403-4.

^151. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2:466; Frederick J. E. Raby, A History of

Christian-Latin Poetry (Oxford: Clarendon,

1927), 4-6; “Artificiality and a servile imitation . . . tended therefore to flourish.

That scholar was near perfection who could

compose in verse or prose according to the

recognized rules; provided that the form was

acceptable, the content was more or less

indifferent,” 5.

^152. Augustine, On Christian Doctrine IV, 2, in PL 34:89-90; II, 50; Augustine, Epistles LXIX, 2, in PL 33:239-40.

^153. András Alföldi, “The Crisis of the Empire,”

Cambridge Ancient History, 12 vols.

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

1981), 12:225-26 (speaking of the plastic

arts); cf. Rostovzeff, Social and Economic History, 521-22, on “the utter incapacity to invent anything new . . . typical of an age

devoid of all creative power.”

^154. Raby, History of Secular Latin Poetry, 1:351.

^155. Henri I. Marrou, Saint Augustine et la fin de la culture antique (Paris: Boccard, 1938), 517-18; cf. 275.

^156. Eggersdorfer, Der heilige Augustinus als Pädagoge, 4-6; Rohde, Der griechische Roman, 345-56.

^157. Quintilian, De Institutione Oratoria XII, 10, 16-17; Norden, Antike Kunstprosa,

1:251-70.

^158. Charles Diehl and Georges Marçais, Le monde oriental de 395 à 1081 (Paris:

Presses universitaires, 1936), 3:113-15. The

numbers of the Sophists and rhetors were

recruited in steadily increasing proportions

from men of Oriental blood, who by the

fifth century completely dominated the field.

^159. Max Pieper, Die ägyptische Literatur (Potsdam: Athenaion, 1927), 21.

^160. Ibid., 34-36. Alfred Wiedemann, Das alte Ägypten (Heidelberg: Winter, 1920), 85-88.

^161. Adolf Erman, Ägypten und ägyptisches Leben im Altertum (Tübingen: Mohr, 1923), 375, 434.

^162. Herman Kees, Ägypten, in Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft, vol. 3, pt. 1, 3a (Munich: Beck, 1933), 284.

^163. T. Eric Peet, A Comparative Study of the Literature of Egypt, Palestine and

Mesopotamia (London: British Academy,

1931), 130.

^164. Alan Gardiner, “The Eloquent Peasant,”

JEA 9 (1923): 6; Pieper, Die ägyptische Literatur, 34-36.

^165. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar (London: Oxford University Press, 1927), 2;

cf. 4-5, 17-24.

^166. Pieper, Die ägyptische Literatur, 88; Kees, Ägypten, 79.

^167. Kees, Ägypten, 80; Rohde, Der griechische Roman, 387.

^168. Erich Ebeling, Keilschrifttexte aus Assur religiösen Inhalts (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1915), 1, no. 111.

^169. Bruno Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, 2 vols. (Heidelberg: Winter, 1920-25),

2:154-55.

^170. Otto Weber, Die Literatur der Babylonier und Assyrier (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1907), 2; Bruno Meissner, Die babylonische-

assyrische Literatur (Wildpark-Potsdam: Athenaion, 1927), 1-2; both cited in Peet,

Comparative Study of the Literature of

Egypt, 8, n. 1.

^171. Meissner, Babylonien und Assyrien, 2:155, 335-37, 353-54, 357-59, 361-62, 429-30,

432.

^172. Carl Brockelmann, Geschichte der arabischen Literatur (Leipzig: Amelangs, 1909), 186.

^173. Paul Kahle, The Cairo Geniza (London: Oxford University Press, 1947), 79-84, 94;

Brockelmann, Geschichte der arabischen

Literatur, 92-101; the literature was completely dominated by rhetoric from the

first.

^174. Brockelmann, Geschichte der arabischen Literatur, 201. Al-Bistani wrote a history of the world entirely in words of double

meaning, ibid., 209.

^175. Ibid., 179; cf. 200, 227.

^176. Carl Brockelmann, Geschichte der arabischen Literatur, 2 vols. (Weimar:

Felber, 1898), 1:245-46 and the following section.

^177. Adam Mez, Die Renaissance des Islams (Heidelberg: Winter, 1922), 162-80, an

amazingly close resemblance to the ancient

Sophists.

^178. Ignaz Goldziher, Vorlesungen über den Islam (Heidelberg: Winter, 1925), 67;

Brockelmann, Geschichte der arabischen

Literatur (1909 ed.), 90 (on Mutanabbi).

^179. Brockelmann, Geschichte der arabischen Literatur (1898 ed.), 1:15; Ibn Qutayba, Introduction au Livre de la poésie et des

poètes Muqaddimatu Kitābi š-šicri wa š-

šucarā’, tr. Gaudefroy-Demombynes (Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1947), pt. 23; cf.

Goldziher, Vorlesungen über den Islam, 74.

^180. The quotation is from Ibn al-Muqaffac, Kalila and Dimna (Beirut: Imprimerie

Catholique, 1927), 136; cf. 31, panegyric

and praise of intelligence; 39, assembly of

the learned; 30, fame and notoriety are all

that count; 42-44, gloria the one object of

life; 57, four tropes of rhetoric; 132, a formal disputatio, and so forth.

^181. Adam Mez, Abulḳâsim, ein bagdâder Sittenbild (Heidelberg: Winter, 1902): Abu

’l-Qāsim is the most celebrated Oriental

version of the vagabond-rhetor. Mez’s

introduction is a vivid description of the

rhetorical-mindedness of the decadent East.

^182. Libanius, Oration XXV, 1: the polarity of free and slave dominates every aspect of

life; “a world of ants and camels without any

true equality,” says Lucian, Epistula ad

Saturnum 1, in Saturnalia 20; cf. Philo, De Monarchia I, 9, in On the Special Laws I, 59-65; Plutarch, De Amore 26. “General servitude was, indeed, the distinctive feature of the age, but while there were different

grades and shades of bondage, there was no

equality,” Rostovzeff, Social and Economic History, 527.

^183. Jaeger, Paideia, 1:332.

^184. This is seen in the translation literature, which was all from Eastern to Western

languages, Von Christ, Geschichte der

griechischen Litteratur, 2:166, 315, 542-624, 665.

^185. Diehl and Marçais, Le monde oriental, 3:320-21, 417-86. Speaking of Christians

and barbarians alike, Von Christ, Geschichte der griechischen Litteratur, 2:955, says

“der Hellenismus zwingt sie in seine

Schule.”

^186. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2:631-32, notes that “Gaul, . . . von jeher das land der Rhetorik,” continued to be so and to act as

“die Erhalterin der antiken Kultur,”

“wahrend des ganzen Mittelalters.”

^187. One thinks immediately of the Thousand-and-One Nights and of the degenerate

Christian literature of the East, of which

some good examples may be found in

Montague R. James, The Apocryphal New

Testament (Oxford: Clarendon, 1925), 49, 53-55, 58-65, 70, 80-83, 337-49, and so

forth. The Oriental Acts are public

disputations in which the Apostles display

their rhetorical skill to packed theaters. The pseudo-scientific element is not lacking, e.g.,

in the Pseudo-Callisthenes, Life of Alexander II, 38, the king sails under the sea in a glass vessel or flies through space, as in Lucian’s trip to the moon sequence in

Lucian, The Dream or Lucian’s Career 15; cf. Lucian, Zeuxis. For comic-strip trivia, Seneca, Controversiae I, 7, 4-5; V, 6; VII, 1, 4-5; IX, 6; X, 3, and so forth.

^188. H. Idris Bell, “The Decay of Civilization,”

JEA 10 (1924): 215.

How to Have a Quiet

Campus, Antique Style

Special Announcement: Why no

footnotes? Because this article is merely a

summing up of what has gone before,

including several egregiously pirated

quotations from the author’s earlier efforts.

The various classical sources exploited have

already been exposed to public view. The

piece was done on short notice to help

celebrate the epiphany at the BYU of an

authentic Rhetor—Greek, political,

ostentatious, and not overly scrupulous. The

ecstatic reception of Mr. Agnew by the

student body was a moving demonstration of

the ageless vitality of the rhetorician’s craft.

H. N., 1991

With the collapse of the old sacral

kingship all around the Mediterranean in the

middle of the first millennium B.C., people

were everywhere asking themselves what

forever after remained the golden question of

the civilized world: “Who’s in charge

around here?” By way of answer, a breed of

ambitious and often capable men, the tyrants,

moved in and took over in the name of law

and order; the fatal weakness of their

position was that their authority, resting

neither on birth nor election, could be

legitimately challenged at any time by

anybody that was strong enough to stand up

to them. So the world shouted paeans of

gratitude and joy when hard on the heels of

the tyrants another and a very different kind

of task-force appeared, a saintly band of

prophets, a generation of wandering

wisemen, the Sophoi, best represented by the immortal Seven Sages. These men of

matchless intellect and sublime compassion,

after correcting the political and moral

disorders of their own societies, wandered

through the world free of earthly passions

and attachments, seeking only wisdom and

imparting freely of their vast knowledge and

perception to distraught and disorganized

communities throughout the ancient world. It

was their selfless activity that put the Greek world on its feet after the Dark Ages, or so it was believed.

Young men everywhere, fascinated by

the powerful minds and godlike

independence of these great teachers,

followed them from city to city in droves,

begging to become their disciples and vying

for the privilege of serving them and of

placing their fortunes (which were often

considerable) at their disposal. Great cities

and mighty potentates were willing to offer anything for the healing ministrations which

the Sophoi gave to all free of charge. It was a shame to see such a highly marketable

product going for nothing, and it was not

long before a new type of wisemen appeared

—the Sophists, meaning so-called or

pseudowisemen. They diligently imitated

every detail of dress, manner, and speech

which had endeared the real Sages to the

whole of mankind, by which bait they too

gathered disciples in their highly publicized

travels and were soon able to settle down

and establish expensive and fabulously

profitable schools in the big cities.

The special education in which these

schools excelled went under the name of

rhetoric, which was boldly and unashamedly

defined and advertised as the art of giving

people exactly what they want in order to get

exactly what you want out of them. To

palliate their sordid commercialism, the Sophist teachers always insisted that they

were frank, searching, unsparing crusaders

of the Emancipated Mind, and it was

Socrates’ dangerous calling to expose the

fraudulence of that claim. He accused the

brotherhood of training their pupils “to

appear, in the eyes of the ignorant, to know

more than those who really know”; to which

they replied that they could see nothing

wrong with that since experience showed

that such clever sales techniques always

paid off. But what is that, Socrates protested, but “a mere knack and a routine—busy work

. . . I call it foul, as I do all ugly things.”

Socrates also foresaw and prophesied that

any system of hard and honest education

would be forced off the market in short order

by a competing system which offered its

students fun and games at school and top

administrative jobs and big pay afterward.

For of course, the Sophists, as would-be successors to the Sophoi, specialized in preparing the young for important public

office and private fortunes: rhetoric was the

manipulation of people, especially in the

mass, and its professors promised wealth,

fame, and power to those who took their

courses, from which it can be readily seen

that Socrates was a troublemaker who would

have to be removed. And removed he was,

by that very class of professors who forever

after proclaimed him their patron saint.

Also removed from competition, as

Socrates predicted, was any field of serious

study that might distract the young from the

business of life—the business of making

money. This was done neatly and effectively

by setting up counter-courses in science,

philosophy, mathematics, and so forth,

which, while pretending to be the real thing,

were much shorter, easier, and spicier than

the old courses, promising the student exactly the same results but with the

assurance (so said the brochure) that “you

can do it all lying down!” Teachers of

rhetoric, having thus forced all other

teachers out of business, soon began to

employ their irresistible weapons with

deadly efficiency against each other. The

escalation of competitive simplification,

sweetening, and spicing soon brought the

schools to that state of total inanity which

never ceases to amaze and appall the student

of ancient rhetoric, the most astounding

phenomenon of all being the endless

succession, generation after generation, of

world-renowned scholars and students who

have absolutely nothing to say but derive

their vital nourishment from the mere fact of

association with a tradition and institution of learning.

Keeping Out of Trouble

The century before Christ was a time of

chronic and mounting social unrest that by

the time of Caesar had become quite

unbearable—it was a world gone mad.

When it began to appear that Augustus

Caesar was the man to put an end to the

worldwide acosmia, all power was put into his hands by a grateful humanity, and

whenever he modestly suggested laying

down the burden of his absolute and ever-

growing powers people simply panicked. By

shrewd economics and iron control of the

military, Augustus gave a feeling of security

to the whole world; his vast construction

projects were meant to give his people a

pleasing, nay a magnificent, environment; by

taking over the supervision and financing of

the youth-clubs throughout Italy, the inventus, he brought under control the most dangerous

and irresponsible expression of the general

social malaise. But the cornerstone of his grand design for preserving peace and order

was education.

As a boy, Augustus had been sent by his

uncle Julius Caesar to study with the great

Apollodorus in Apollonia. Apollodorus was

a typical Sophist whose writings have

probably done more to wreck the cause of

real education (by supplanting the reading of

original authors by his own required college

survey) than those of any other man. Now the

theme song of the Sophists was that

education is the solution to all social ills,

and Augustus firmly believed what the

secretary of a later emperor wrote, that

education alone gives Rome the right to rule

the world. Accordingly, he spared no pains

in searching out and encouraging any sign of

talent in the young. He would agree with

Pliny that the education of the poor is the

responsibility of the Princeps. Pericles had

made Athens “the teacher of Hellas” by bringing together under his hospitable roof

the greatest thinkers in every field; the

Scipionic circle in Rome had tried the same

sort of thing. Augustus, following their

example, drew the professors of the East to

Rome with fabulous salaries and total

indulgence of their vanity: he not only

allowed them complete freedom of speech

but patiently suffered their outrageous

insolence.

After the death of the dull and busy

grind Hyginus, the presidency of the great palatine academy went to M. P. Marcellus,

an ex-boxer who told the emperor, “You

supply the people, but we supply the

education”—and he got away with it. So did

his successor, Paelemon, an ex-slave who announced that real education had begun at

his birth and would perish at his death;

though two successive emperors, Tiberius

and Claudius, both declared Paelemon utterly unfit to teach the youth because of his gross and vicious immorality, his position

was never in jeopardy, because he had

written a handbook of rules for correct

speech. Timagenes came to Rome from

Alexandria as a cook, got a job as a litter-

bearer, took up rhetoric, and ended up as a

close friend of Augustus, who tolerated his

unbelievable impudence in hopes that there

might be real intelligence behind it. There

was not. The Egyptian Apion was lured to Rome from the presidency of the University

of Alexandria; Pliny called him “the drum of

his own fame,” and the salty Tiberius gave

him the title of “the cymbal of the universe”

to describe his brash and ceaseless boasting

and self-glorification. He produced nothing

of value.

Space will not allow us to unfold the

long catalogue of men who guided the

thinking of the civilized world for a thousand years. Let it suffice to name Symmachus,

perhaps the most influential man in

scholarship and government the Roman

world ever saw, of whose greatest writing

Professor Raby wrote: “The ordinary reader

. . . seeks in vain some glimmer of

reasonableness, some promise of sense.”

What more compelling testimony could there

be than the careers of such men to the

miraculous powers of that system of

Education for Success inaugurated by the

Sophists of old? In time every town in the

empire was provided with schoolmasters at

government expense: three Sophists for a

small town, four Sophists and four

grammarians for county-court towns ( agorai dikon), and five rhetors and five

grammarians for cities. From Vespasian on,

the Imperial government paid the salaries of

teachers, including, under Severus

Alexander, the elementary teacher in every village. Justinian issued his pragmatic

sanction “that the youth may be trained in

liberal studies throughout the domain.”

The student registering in any of the

schools was entering a world of make-

believe. Indeed, schole and its Latin

equivalent, ludus, both mean “play”—the school is a little universe of its own where

one engages in such “liberal” activities as

are not prescribed by the exigencies of real

life. The “education for life” idea, Dio

Chrysostom noted, really turned the

schoolroom into a playroom and rendered

the student peculiarly unfit for life. One of

the main functions of the school was to keep

the young out of trouble by channelling their

energies into traditional and accepted areas

of expression. The system was originally

designed for upper-class youths, brought up

by slaves who spoiled them rotten,

traditionally permitted to indulge in properly directed political rioting and midnight

depredations against the lower classes and

their leaders. They were petted and envied

by the whole society, which officially

prolonged adulescentia and its licenses to the age of forty. “Nature itself suggests

desires to youth,” wrote Cicero, “and if they

injure no one else’s life, whatever they do is endurable and pardonable . . . only a crank

would deny youth their amours with

courtesans.” Philostratus blasts the Romans

for their scrupulous attention to harbors and

roads while “neither you nor your laws show

the slightest interest in the children of your cities, or in the young people or women.” St.

Augustine bears this out: if a boy was in

school his parents could forget about him; if

he was not in school nobody cared about him.

The hell-fire clubs of Athens and the

scandalous rioting of Alcibiades and his crowd were a direct result of the

“emancipated” and permissive teachings of

the Sophists. Of course, such behavior was

disavowed by the professors, who made a

special point of insisting that a teacher was

never to be held responsible for anything a

pupil might do; for that matter, a teacher was not responsible for what he might do.

Lactantius says that the most immoral and

greedy professor he ever knew specialized

in courses in virtue and the austere life. And why not? “What good does it do,” wrote

John Chrysostom, the greatest teacher of his

day, “to pay high salaries to teachers and

raise up a host of experts when the actions of our society speak so much louder than their

safe, conventional platitudes? For discipline

of the mind is as far beyond mere lectures on

education as doing is from talking.”

The schools, designed to please and

attract the youth, made no attempt to limit their fun but only to channel it. Quintilian,

after some hesitation, decided that the

corruption of morals, which was a natural

and expected part of life at the bigger

schools, was after all a price worth paying

for the stimulation, associations,

competition, and professional openings they

offered. Everywhere, as Rohde puts it,

“people of every class became inflamed

with a desire to achieve the new ‘success.’”

Parents pushed their children into it: “Full of ambition for their children,” wrote

Petronius, “they don’t want to see them study

the hard way, . . . and of course everybody is going to school in such numbers that you

can’t even count them.” They all want to

begin at the top, says Pliny, “want to know

everything at once . . . and are quite satisfied with themselves as they are.” Should

institutions which cater to adolescent minds,

Quintilian wondered, be allowed to set the tone of the whole civilized world? That is

the very thing, he decided, which brought

about the dire intellectual decline of the

times. But still, it was precisely because the students were not given to any serious thinking that even their wildest actions were

looked upon with indulgence: the students of

Carthage, St. Augustine reports, “commit all

kinds of outrages with perfect insolence and

immunity, things punishable by law, but

permitted by custom” to the students.

What kind of “protest” would one

expect from such students? The idealism of

youth had been harnessed and contained from

the beginning in the high-flown and altruistic cliches of standardized speeches to be

learned by heart. Lysias’s “Twenty-fifth

Oration” (his very worst), was the model for

the schools because of its stereotyped

treatment of the prescribed theme, “No Man

is Born an Oligarch or a Democrat.” The so-called Pagan Martyrs of Alexandria were a

band of professors who collided with a mad

emperor on the subject not of human rights

but of professional prerogative, and so lost

their heads. Real idealism is hard to find—

there were teachers with great hearts and great minds, like Dyscolus, Eratosthenes,

Marcus Porcius Cato, and Aetius, but they

all found the doors of the schools closed

against them. Only Eratosthenes held his own

against the united malice of the faculty of

Alexandria.

In Egypt, where priest-led student

factions had been rioting for untold

centuries, the Romans shrewdly put

responsibility for social order in the hands

of the gymnasiarch, the local schoolteacher, who was made president of the town council

or of the assembly of archons in the home

capital where he lived. But the rioting went

right on, with the gymnasiarch usually leading one of the factions. “There is the man who stirs up all the trouble!” cried the Jews

of Alexandria when the schoolteacher

Hierax entered the theater. Like the later

qudi, the gymnasiarch was out to promote himself and sometimes rose to giddy heights

of power.

But everybody was playing the same

game. As Dio Chrysostom told his students

who hesitated to go the Sophist path: “Do

you think you are any wiser than Croesus,

who was the richest man in the world and

took the advice of Sophists?” “What’s wrong

with studying to get rich?” the great Isocrates would ask, “why else do we exercise piety,

justice, and the other virtues if not to

promote ourselves?” If one is sincere, he

explains, there is no moral default, and any

properly trained rhetor knows how to make

himself really sincere. The student, Cicero

says quite frankly, “must refer everything to his own ends” and never cease asking, quid mihi utilius—what is there in it for me? The program geared to “the naked self-interest

(which) ruled in the rhetorical schools” from

Isocrates on (Wm. Schmid) was all that any

ambitious boy could ask for; they all took to

it like ducks to water. “What song is

sweeter?” asks Cicero, “than that of the

rhetorician, . . . what is fuller, more subtle, intellectual, admirable, fulfilling,

satisfying?”

Manus Manum Lavat

Discipline was not severe because the

student was in a position to blackmail the

teacher, and they both knew it. It was

common practice at Rome, according to

Augustine, for students to avoid paying a

teacher when the fees were due by

conspiring together and all of a sudden

removing to another teacher in a body. This would mean disaster to the professor, whose

name, fame, and fortune naturally depended

wholly on the number of students he could attract. So professors would pay students to

attend their lectures (a sound investment

since the state paid them by the numbers),

and every teacher at a great university had to have his “chorus” of supporters among the

students, a devoted band who would recruit

more students (often by force), applaud their

hero hysterically at the end of every

sentence, heckle rival professors, and fight

rival choruses in the streets and at the games and shows. At first the choruses were made

up of students from a single country—like

the Syrians at Athens who supported

Eunapius because he was a Syrian—but

membership soon became general as the

gangs would wait at the docks to carry off

newly arrived students as pledges (the

“foxes”) or send their scouts out into the provincial cities to pledge boys intending to

come to Athens to school.

So from beginning to end the first

principle of rhetoric—that size and number

are everything—dominated the schools. In

return for their support, the students were

spared all discipline. The most famous

professor of them all, Libanius, has told how

his students would laugh, talk, yawn, catch

flies, look out of the window, sleep, draw

pictures, and do anything but listen to his

celebrated lectures, and then leave the hall

for the games, shows, parties, stews, markets

—anything but study. Why didn’t the most

influential teacher of his day make an effort

to check this sort of thing? Because the boast and glory of his life was that he had more students than anybody else. He was

enormously vain of his success as a teacher,

and well illustrates how the pact of mutual

corruption kept things going: in return for his complete permissiveness he insisted on one

thing—that nobody ever criticize him;

because of his enormous following his

shallow letters (1600 of which survive)

carried great prestige and his name bore

irresistible authority: Libanius could make

or break any man’s career. And because of

his great influence and renown, it was very

much in the interest of any student to say he

had studied with Libanius. So who held the

whip handle after all? A multitude of

students made a Libanius, an Iamblichus, or

a Stilpon (at one time he had 30,000

students) great, and the hordes had no choice

but to follow the great man whose name

alone could give them prestige. The

astounding thing is that none of the great

professors ever produced anything of value

—the game is the purest make-believe, and

yet it went on and on for centuries as the

self-serving giants of education were able to

“keep up the appearance of success by

mutual praise and admiration.” It was the

education-government complex that kept

things going: the great professors were all

related by birth or marriage to each other

and to the imperial family; everybody knew everybody else, and the school remained, as

the Sophists designed it to be, the door to

top-level positions in public life. The

students knew what they were after and that

only the school could give it to them. Why

should they ever rock the boat?

The collapse of ancient civilization was

marked by the rise, in the words of Fr. Blass, of “despotism, servilism, and scholarship.”

Note that scholarship does not go down with the ship. It torpedoes it. Years ago we wrote

that “the very thing that stifled learning was pure oxygen to the schools,” namely, that

preoccupation with office-work, with

classifying and compiling and grading and processing became the whole concern of

scholarship in the Dark Ages. Of course

there is plenty of learned noise all the time—

the one thing that kept professors going,

wrote Epicharmus, was their constitutional

inability to shut up whether they had anything to say or not. (Indeed, Boethus of Tarsus

became the richest man in the empire by

guaranteeing to teach anyone to speak on any

subject for any length of time.) But aside

from that, the well of scholarship could

never run dry as long as the art of literary

criticism survived; professors took sides in

critical debates which endured literally for

hundreds of years as a learned pretext for

those wonderful academic feuds which of course centered around personalities, spread

throughout the entire world, and gave to the

careers of the learned an appearance of real

emotion and enthusiasm: the smaller the

minds, the greater the vigor and dedication they brought to the feuds. The favorite issue

for taking sides was not Homer or Vergil but

the “New (Asian) Education” versus the

“Old (Attic or Classic) Education”: they

were of equal age and as alike as peas in a

pod, but they provided the unfailing topic for discussion that kept generations of

professors in congenial and remunerative

employment. The busywork of the schools

looked impressive from the outside, but as

Clement of Alexandria noted, there was

really nothing to it, “babbling away in their

own special jargon, toiling their whole

lifetime about special definitions . . . itching and scratching.” It was all as easy as

sneezing once one got the knack of it. “It was their own lack of productivity which forced

(the professors) to address themselves ever

and again to these same threadbare issues,”

wrote E. Norden.

One theme above all provided the great professor with a subject worthy of his pen,

namely the lives of the great professors,

beginning with his own. Favorinus, who

knew Fronto and Plutarch, was a friend of

the Emperor Hadrian, and taught at Ephesus

and Rome where the fabulously rich Herodes

Atticus attended his lectures, achieved the

pinnacle of fame by an oration on the subject

of his own greatness and left as his life’s

work a great chaotic opus in twenty-four

volumes—about himself. Illustrious men

travelled ceaselessly from library to library

gathering material on the lives of illustrious men who had spent their lives travelling

from library to library gathering materials,

etc., etc. When one entered the school, one

automatically ceased to be one of the vulgar

—and that is why the vulgar clamored in

their thousands, at the invitation of the

emperor, to get into the school. And because

the door was kept open and the prize was never beyond the hope of even the stupidest

boy, provided only he had ambition, the

school maintained its marvelous equilibrium

and stability for centuries. The ambitious

boys, the kind who lead student riots, were

the least inclined of all to protest.

The only real danger was serious

thought. This is well illustrated in the career of Apuleius, who was showered with honors

and had statues of himself erected in a

hundred cities in recognition of his rhetorical compositions in praise of smoke, of dust, of

sleep, of indifference, even an oration “In

Praise of Nothing”; but he had to face mobs

in the streets and prosecution in the courts

when it leaked out that he had private

opinions of his own—very devout religious

opinions, to be sure, but unconventional—

and had been up to such sneaky

nonconformist tricks as inventing a tooth

powder.

Whatever happens to the world, Seneca

the Elder assures us, the school is bound to

survive because there is nothing left to take

its place after (1) the natural law of decay

has done its work, (2) the growth of luxury

softens and corrodes a civilization, and (3)

the centralized government of the principate

leaves no issues for public debate. The

impression that the schools of every age

make on Eduard Meyer is one of “perpetual

decline.” Actually the ancient school did not

decline, for as Dionysius of Halicarnassus

says, it was already decadent in the time of

Alexander; it was born sick. The trouble is,

according to Dio Chrysostom, that there is

really nothing significant for young people to do; there is no real demand for their

services, and so they all converge on the

university, the one place where doing nothing

is respectable. He mentions the phenomenal

growth of the big new universities, such as that of Celaenae, where countless droves of

people flock together, people interested in

all sorts of litigation and business deals,

rhetoricians, political scientists, promoters, flunkeys, pimps, procurers, teamsters

(muleteers), hucksters, harlots, dealers, and

con-men in every line—the new super-

university had become all things to all men.

Dormite Secure, Cives!

In its victorious career the school

overcame its two most serious opponents

with surprising efficiency and dispatch. They

were the church and the barbarians.

Christianity offered the world the one good

chance it ever had of breaking the vicious

cycle of corruption and fraud centering in the schools. But the schools had a monopoly on

the Things of This World as well as the

Honors of Men, and the voices from another

world that might have brought men to their senses were soon silenced. As early as the

second century, in the approving words of

Dr. R. Milburn, “uplifted eyes . . . turned

back to earth to find their assurance in hard

facts.” St. Augustine’s immortal De Doctrina Christiana is but a rhetorician’s invitation to the church to attain mental maturity by

signing up permanently with the university.

At the Council of Nicaea when the Christian

doctors were displaying themselves as

typical vain and wrangling professors, a

poor layman, one of the “confessors,” arose

in the audience and rebuked and abashed

them: Which was it to be, the Kingdom of

Heaven or the University? When the church

went to school and became respectable, and

when a bishop had to hold a university

degree in rhetoric, then the Christian

populace, cheated of their promise of

another and a better world, everywhere burst

out in appalling demonstrations of helpless rage. The wild monks who attacked the

University of Alexandria were acting like

hysterical children, but what course was

open to them against the entrenched power of

the schools? In the end the police power of

the state, at the insistent demand of the great orating bishops, mowed the protestors down

in hundreds of thousands. They made a

desert and they called it a peace, and so, as

Raby puts it, “the old life of the schools

continued, and men could think of nothing

better to aim at than what they had been

doing unimaginatively for centuries.”

Although the barbarians, Franks, Goths,

Visigoths, Vandals, Saxons, Arabs, and

others may have destroyed, they were

completely captivated by the schools. Their

kings and princes, stunned with admiration

of what they took to be a flowering

civilization, diligently set themselves to

composing letters and verse in the learned, tasteless, and trivial manner of the schools,

and went all-out in largescale crash

programs of civilizing their followers

through the offices of the old established

educational system. “The grammatical art is

not used by barbarous kings,” wrote the

unbelievably insipid secretary of the

barbarian Theodosius to his master, who

took it all in. “It abides uniquely with

legitimate sovereigns.” And so the warlords

of the steppes submitted to the authority of

the schoolmen as willingly as the Christian

doctors had.

The school year at the University of

Athens was opened with prayers, offerings,

and a formal oration welcoming the students

to the “sanctuary.” Every school with its

sacred groves, temple, and library was in

theory a shrine of the Muses, a place of

inspiration and retreat from the world. Not

the least important factor in maintaining the marvelous stability of the institutions was the carefully cultivated atmosphere, the image of

deep and dedicated study, the look of

learning. The aura of sanctity which the

Sophists cast about themselves and their

schools, with their robes, their titles, and

their ceremonies, was the crowning touch of

their art, the ultimate answer to the critics

and the doubters. However prone to riot in

the streets and stews, the shows, baths, and

games, the students of the ancient university

always seemed to behave themselves pretty

well on the campus. The formula for

preserving order emerges with striking

clarity from an ample mass of documents

covering a long period of time. Whoever

would avoid serious student protest or

dangerous demands has simply to follow the

rules of the Sophist schools:

1. Free the student from the necessity of

any prolonged or strenuous mental effort.

2. Give him a reasonable assurance that

the school is helping him toward a career.

3. Confine moral discipline to the

amenities, paying special attention to dress

and grooming. The student will have his own

sex-life anyway.

4. Keep him busy with fun and games—

extracurricular activity is the thing.

5. Allay any subconscious feelings of

guilt due to idleness and underachievement

by emphasis on the greatness of the

institution, which should be frequently

dramatized by assemblies and ceremonies;

an atmosphere of high purpose and exalted

dedication is the best insurance against

moments of honest misgiving.

Here, then, was the secret of order and

stability in the ancient schools.

New Light on Scaliger

No better introduction could be desired

to the life and works of the marvelous

Joseph Justus Scaliger than Mr. Warren

Blake’s fine study, 1 nor is any theme more timely than the story of the man who

demonstrated as none other how great are the

staying powers of scholarship in a world

fallen upon evil times. To all existing

Scaligerana, however, there remain yet a few

notes to be added, from hitherto neglected

sources, to correct some common

misconceptions.

The Name

It is well in holding up the image of

Scaliger as a guide and inspiration to the

studiosa iuventus (zealous youth) to establish the proper pronunciation of his

celebrated name. There is an endearing

quality to “Scaliger” with a hard g;

something catchy—almost rakish—that is

missing from the universally recommended

“Scalijer.” The novice guilty of “Scaligger”

is sure to be corrected if not rebuked by the

polite insistence of his betters on the French or Italian form of the name—as colorless to

our ears as the other is lively. It is with

considerable satisfaction that we are able to

propose to those who pedantically insist on

the soft g a no less pedantic and quite

crushing argument for the other.

Mr. Robinson’s useful collection of

materials on Scaligger includes a portrait of

the great man “from the engraving by J. de

Leeuw, made from a water-color portrait of

Scaliger which was painted shortly before

his death,” 2 in which he holds in his left hand

a missive addressed “to Joseph Scaliger,”

while with his right he pens a reply headed

Is. Casaubono Iosephus Scaliger S. P. (cf.

fig. 18). Now the note which he holds from

Casaubon is addressed to Scaliger in

Arabic, the name being written with

exaggerated attention to phonetic values:

“Yūsuf Sqāligh-r.” 3 The g of the name is here rendered by Arabic ghain, and we are

fortunate in knowing the exact sound of that

letter when used by our two learned

correspondents, for Scaliger explains with

great exactness in a letter to his friend4 that ghain is always to be pronounced as a hard g, never like the soft French or Italian jim or g, which must be represented, he insists, by

Arabic jim (“Gimel”):

Quia pronunciatio Gimel apud Arabas

in omni syllaba est, ut apud Gallos in

Ge, & Gi, hoc est, mollis. Quando

autem Arabes Ga volunt usurpare, utuntur’ ain cum puncto (i.e., ghain, as it appears in the portrait), quod est

illorum g Germanicum . . . hoc est,

durum.

Since the Arabs always pronounce

gimel soft, like the “ge” and “gi” in

French. But when the Arabs wish to

pronounce ga [i.e., hard g] they make

use of the dotted cain which is the

German g.

In the portrait from the Senate Hall in

the University of Leyden (the frontispiece of

Robinson’s book) Scaliger is shown

solemnly penning an Arabic missive upside

down! But this is a slip that could not possibly have occurred where it was a case

not of copying any Arabic writing at hand but

of actually composing the text, and we may

be sure that whoever it was who advised the

artist or supplied him with the writing—and it may have been Scaliger himself—knew

what he was doing when he wrote the name

to be pronounced in the classical Latin, or

English, manner with a hard, guttural g.

Figure 18. Portrait of Joseph Scaliger

Scaliger as Autodidactus

It is more than a matter of idle curiosity

to inquire by what procedure the most

learned of mortals acquired his education.

After 1555, when he was fifteen, Scaliger

“never returned to school; nor did he get any

regular instruction at home.” At nineteen he

went to Paris to study with the great

Turnebus, but of that study he reports “non

diu viva voce, sed potius mutis magistris

usus sum” (I made use of silent masters

rather than living ones), and he applies to

himself Casaubon’s own protestations of

being “opsimathes et autodidactus” (late in

learning and self-taught). 5 “Of the four years Scaliger spent at the University of Paris,”

writes Pattison after long searching, “nothing

is known.” 6 We only just glimpse the young student for a brief moment as the door of his

solitary study closes upon him, and are left

with the picture—drawn by both Bernays

and Pattison—of the baffled beginner, failing

to comprehend the advanced lectures of

Turnebus, locking himself in a garret to seize in time the crown of learning “aus eigener,

autodidaktischer Machtvollkommenheit” (by

his own, self-taught perfection of power), as

Bernays says. 7 Bayle, in his Dictionary, suggests a different motive for Scaliger’s

retirement, namely that he found Turnebus’s

class not too advanced but too slow and

backward, and so “he shut himself up in his

closet, resolving to use no master but

himself.” Bayle then goes on to note that

after mastering Greek, Scaliger “turned his

thoughts to the Hebrew tongue, which he

learned by himself with great facility.” 8

Now it is definitely known that Scaliger

did not learn Hebrew “by himself with great facility, ”9 and yet in making the claim Bayle is taking no greater liberties than when he

and others state that Scaliger was

autodidactus (self-taught) in Greek, the authority for both claims being the same,

namely the important “First Epistle.” It is

only a complete lack of documents that

forces one to assume that he pursued a

course of self-education with brilliant

success in the more difficult field and total

failure in the other. Scaliger’s self-education rests simply on the argument of silence.

The silence is now broken by a few

welcome words, scribbled beneath the

frontispiece portrait in a book of Scaliger’s

Epistolae Omnes, now in the University of California Library, published in Frankfurt in

1628 and acquired in the same year by one

who signs himself Andreas Lucius, possibly

of the famous Swiss family of philologists.

Throughout the book Lucius has jotted down marginal notes, among them the above

mentioned, which reads:

Solu(s) hic est sapiens, alii volitant

velut umbrae. Hic ille est, quem in

prima adhuc aetate tantopere admiratus

est vir in literis maximus, Hadrianus

Turnebus, ut portentosi ingenii juvenem

appellare non dubitaret. Ut in epistola

quadam ad Meursium scripta Jacobus

Gillosus Consiliarius Gallicus instatur

( sic).

He alone is wise, while the others flit

about like shades. This is the one who

even at an early age was regarded with

such admiration by the outstanding

literary figure of the time, Turnebus, that

he did not hesitate to call him a youth of

marvelous character. Thus Jacques

Gillot states in a letter written to van

Meurs.

The Meursius in question is the

celebrated Jan van Meurs, in whose youthful

studies Scaliger had taken a lively interest. 10

Jacques Gillot, who here reports on

Scaliger, was one of those whose chief

delight is to search out and cultivate the

genius of others, in which generous zeal he

made his home the intellectual clearinghouse

of the age.11 His keen interest in the studies of others, as well as the fact that he and

Scaliger were studying the same things in

Paris at the same time (they were of about

the same age, Gillot perhaps somewhat

older), makes him the man most likely to

know the facts about Scaliger’s Paris dates.

Certainly the picture of the young student

commanding the admiration of the great

professor of Greek from the first agrees far

better with what is known of the man’s

character and accomplishments, of his policy of always taking fullest advantage of

whatever instruction was available, of the

zeal with which he would throw himself into

the thick of any important discussion, than

does the strange picture of the abashed and

retiring youth which Scaliger only suggests

and which his biographers have filled out.

Scaliger was anything but a self-taught

recluse.

Scaliger’s Titles

One of the most engaging aspects of

Scaliger study is the variety of epithets

which have always been attached to his

name. From the hand of the enthusiastic

Lucius, we have a witness of how even in

Scaliger’s own day men were intrigued by

these gorgeous epithets; for that student

collects them as one would stamps and fills

the flyleaf of the book mentioned with lists

of Nomina Scaligero a doctissimis hominibus data (names given to Scaliger by learned men), much as Robinson has chosen

a number of such epithets as the opening

words of his book. Lucius’s collection,

which includes where possible the names of

the inventors of the various “blurbs” is

worth citing:

Abyssus eruditionis, Scientiarum mare,

sol doctorum, patris divini divina

suboles, genus Deorum, Perpetuus

literarum dictator, Hercules Musarum

(Casaub.), Unicum saeculi decus (Cas.),

Daemonium hominis (Lips.),

Literatorum Rex (Lips.), Illustrissimum

ingenium huius (?) aevi (Lips.), Magnus

filiarum Mnemosynes Antipes (Lips.),

Divini ingenii vir (Florens Christianus),

Maximum naturae opus o miraculum,

Extremus naturae conatus, Aquila in

nubibus (Lips.), Unus, cui tota Musarum sacris operatorum cohors assurgit, cui

principes Musici coetus fasces

submittunt (Casaub.), Sol unicus

doctrinarum & eruditionis (Cas.),

Mirincus vir, & quem Homeri verbis

iure appelles: daiphrona poikilometen

(Lips.).

Bottomless pit of learning, a sea of

knowledge, a sun among the learned,

divine offspring of a divine father, race

of the Gods, universal lord of letters,

Hercules of the Muses, sole splendor of

the age, a little spirit of a man, king of

literati, the most distinguished spirit of

this age, the great offspring of the

daughters of Mnemosyne, a man of

heavenly character, oh miracle, the

greatest work of nature, the final effort

of nature, an eagle among the clouds,

one to whom the whole host of Muses gives preference because of the sacred

things of the workers, single sun of

erudition and learning, a remarkable

man and one whom you would rightly

name with words from Homer: skilled,

much devising.

Notes

This article, written in response to

Warren E. Blake’s “Joseph Justus

Scaliger,” Classical Journal 36 (1940): 83-91, was published in Classical Journal 37

(1942): 291-95.

Notes

This article was originally published

in Brigham Young University Studies 9

(1969): 440-52.

Footnotes

^1. Warren E. Blake, “Joseph Justus Scaliger,”

Classical Journal 36 (1940): 83-91.

^2. George W. Robinson, Autobiography of Joseph Scaliger (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1927), 21.

^3. Written with long alif where a short one (on which the accent would fall naturally) would

have done as well, and with emphatic qaf

instead of kaf; the transliteration does not give the name its Arabic form, which would

be Iskalliji(ī)r, but attempts only to preserve its current pronunciation.

^4. Joseph Justus Scaliger, Epistolae Omnes Quae Reperiri Potuerunt (Frankfurt:

Aubriorum & Schleichii, 1628), LXII

(1606).

^5. Ibid., Epistola XXXV (1594).

^6. Henry Nettleship, ed., Essays by the Late Mark Pattison, 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1889), 1:139.

^7. Jakob Bernays, Joseph Justus Scaliger (Berlin: Hertz, 1855), 5; cf. Blake, “Joseph

Justus Scaliger,” 85.

^8. Pierre Bayle, An Historical and Critical Dictionary, 4 vols. (London: Harper, 1710), s.v. “Scaliger.”

^9. Nettleship, ed., Essays by the Late Mark Pattison, 138; Bernays, Joseph Justus Scaliger, 36. We find Scaliger, very shortly after taking up the language, seeking

instruction from various experts, ibid., 122-

24; Nettleship, ed., Essays by the Late Mark Pattison, 1:202-5.

^10. Scaliger was greatly angered that one of Meursius’s early promises should have been

spoiled by too much success, Joseph J.

Scaliger, Prima Scaligerana (Utrecht:

Petrus Elzevirius, 1670), s.v. “Meursius”;

Bayle, Dictionary, s.v. “Meursius,” writes:

“We learn from Vossius’s 114th Letter that

Scaliger had many strokes in them (i.e., his

epistolae) against Meursius, whose name was suppressed in the impression by

substituting an asterisc [sic]. " Cf.

Eyssenhardt, “Meursius,” in R. v.

Lilieneron, ed., Allgemeine deutsche

Biographie, 56 vols. (Leipzig: Duncker & Homblot, 1885), 21:538; and Weiss,

“Mersius (Jean Ier),” in Joseph F. Michaud,

Biographie universelle ancienne et

moderne, 45 vols. (Paris: Desplaces, 1854-65), 28:155-57.

^11. Weiss, “Gillot (Jacques),” in Michaud, Biographie universelle, 16:464-65. It was at Gillot’s house that the authors of the Satyre Menippee “were united in a veritable cult of the absent Scaliger,” Mark Pattison, Isaac Casaubon, 1559-1614, 2d ed. (Oxford:

Clarendon, 1892), 115.

Three Shrines: Mantic,

Sophic, and Sophistic

I. The Mantic Substratum

In his recent study of the gods of the

Greeks, Professor Kerenyi compares the

classical scholar thumbing through his notes

and handbooks in search of an outworn creed

with Sir George Gray, who long ago had

joined in the feasts and dances of the Maoris

and learned their language and legends in

order to pluck the heart out of their mystery. 1

The comparison is too sanguine. As long ago

as the fourth century, Synesius could report

as a quaint oddity the presence in the Aegean

islands of peasants who still believed in the

Cyclops2—but they have long since passed

away. No living informant can satisfy the modern scholar’s craving for a firsthand

introduction to the gods of Greece, and if the investigator goes to the written sources he

will soon find that they were all put down by

schoolmen (mostly Christians) who believe

the myths and legends as little as he does. 3

How then can they or he presume to criticize

a religion in which they do not believe—is

that not akin to the folly of criticizing a

painting which one has not seen or music

which one has not heard? The insider and the

outsider do not experience the same thing at

all. Students of Greek religion, however they

may yearn for a whiff of incense or

asphodel, can smell today nothing but the

musk and floorwax of the stacks, the last

labyrinthine retreat of the ancient mysteries.

What justifies these remarks is the

conviction that there is something in Greek

religion which even at this vast remove of

time and in spite of the officious and bookish handling of evidence can still reach us and

move us. To become aware of this thing the

modern analytic mind must be subjected to a

gentle softening process, first by placing it

over the low flame of a harmless

generalization.

For many years the regular reading of

the Old Norse sagas was part of a self-

inflicted curriculum to which I faithfully

adhered. Then one day in the midst of a

typical tale of family feuds and mayhem I

suddenly admitted to myself a proposition I

had known all along, but out of loyalty to my

own cultural heritage had refused to

acknowledge: “Let’s face it,” I said aloud,

“these people are not interesting.” From that

day to this I have not read a word of

Icelandic. But I have wondered why my

forebears are so uninteresting—after all,

their passion and their intelligence were both

of a high order, their deeds are nowhere surpassed for nobility, depravity, violence,

or magnanimity. Why is it that the Greeks and

Arabs, as savage and villainous and tricky as

any people anywhere, continue to be so

fascinating, while Scandinavians, Slavs,

Armenians, and Byzantines leave us cold? I

have the answer: the Greeks and Arabs

always seem to be expecting something,

while the others are expecting nothing. E. V.

Gordon is right: the heroic stamp of the

Norse epic is its mood of utter hopelessness.

“A good resistance against overpowering

odds was made the characteristic situation. .

. . The gods themselves knew that they would

in the end be overwhelmed by the evil

powers. . . . Every religious-minded man of

the heathen age believed that he existed for

the sake of that hopeless cause.” 4 The Greeks and Arabs yield to none in their

depreciation of the hopes of this life; they

expect no more of this world than our Norse forebears. The difference is their constant

awareness, more often implied than

expressed, of something beyond this world.

“God is the Knower,” says the Arab at the

end of every discourse, leaving the door

open for any possible subsequent

developments.

Socrates ended his life with a speech

that emphasized two points: (1) that he had

not found in this life what he was looking for, and knew of no one else who had;5 and (2) that failure had not in the least abated his conviction that what he was looking for was

to be found.6 He never claimed to have found his treasure, but he never gave up looking.

This attitude is most dramatically embodied

in the Egyptian culture. “Never on this

earth,” wrote Eduard Meyer, “have men

sought with such energy and persistence to

make the impossible possible in spite of

everything, . . . believing on its possibility with a bitter tenacity.” 7 “The impression made on the modern mind,” writes I.E.S.

Edwards, “is that of a people searching in

the dark for a key to truth and, having found

not one but many keys resembling the pattern

of the lock, retaining all lest perchance the

appropriate one should be discarded.” 8 It is an awesome thing to contemplate the greatest

nation of antiquity, often described by

Egyptologists as the most hard-headed,

down-to-earth, shrewdly practical,

unimaginative, critical, and observant, level-

headed people on earth, as pouring out their

vast energies and treasure for centuries on

end in a wild gamble on the chances of

immortality.

But even in their most ancient writings

“we constantly come upon signs of

indecision and doubt,” writes Louis Speelers

of the Coffin Texts. “Confusion reigns . . .

both in literary expression and especially in their cerebral realm.” 9 The builder of the Great Pyramid, we are told, “spent all his

time seeking for himself the secret

chambers, ”10 searching in the ancient books for the secrets of life, as many another

Pharaoh did after him. They had their doubts,

to put it mildly, but the point is that they

always kept searching and expecting. And so

they have never ceased to fascinate the rest

of us, while the scholars who take them to

task for their foolishness today interest

nobody. The Egyptians, so to speak, never

stopped looking behind the door (and in their

case the expression is more than a figurative

one), and so they appeal to us and excite us

strangely. And so the Jews, too—intelligent,

critical, skeptical, and sarcastic—can never,

try as they will, entirely free themselves

from the whisperings of the Kabbalah and a

haunting sense of wonderful things to come

(2 Nephi 6:12-14); while the early Christians define their faith as pure

expectation: “the substance of things hoped for” (Hebrews 11:1; emphasis added). The

wonder of the Bible for Alfred North

Whitehead is that it “excels in its suggestion of infinitude. . . . Possibilities are infinite, and even though we may not apprehend

them, those infinite possibilities are

actualities. ” 11 He ends his essay on science and religion with the words, “The death of

religion comes with the repression of the

high hope of adventure.”

In all these cases the important thing is

not what is expected—Whitehead realizes that he knows no more than Socrates just

what it is. What could be more vague and

illdefined than “infinite possibilities”? The

important thing is that something is expected, but if that expectation is not real, it is nothing. To be a believer you must be a

literalist with a mind open to “infinite possibilities.” But traditional Christianity

loathes and disowns literalism—a crime of

which Catholics and Protestants have been

accusing each other over the centuries.

The theme of these talks is that the

Greeks (like the Christian church that later

followed in their footsteps), passed from a

primoridal “Mantic” order of things to the

“Sophic,” and lost their original mood of

expectation, putting something else in its

place. It passed from the Mantic to the

Sophic, and thence in its attempts to combine

the two, arrived at the Sophistic. The Greeks

passed through the same three stages before

the Christians did, and it was their particular brand of Sophic and Sophistic that the

Church accepted. It is time to define these

terms, Sophic and Mantic.

Josephus, citing Manetho, describes an

Egyptian king who was obsessed with a

yearning to possess the prophetic gifts and enjoy the heavenly visions of his ancestors

as a sophos kai mantikos aner—" a Sophic and a Mantic man”; 12 and Theophrastus observes this significant dualism when he

points out that the Egyptians are the most

rational people alive (logiōtaton genos),

inheriting and inhabiting the most religious

of environments (hierōtatēn . . . chōran). 13

These are the two basic human attitudes, the

rational and the religious. It was the age-old struggle between hardheaded realism and

holy tradition that produced the bedizzening

subtleties and endless elaborations of

Egyptian theology from Heliopolis and

Thebes to Alexandria. And it was at that last

and latest center of holy thought—a city

built, literally, with funds contributed in hot competition by rival priestly schools and

factions14—that the basic theological concepts of the Jewish, Christian, and

Moslem doctors with all their sublime, incomprehensible, and insoluble

contradictions took their life.

Dio Chrysostom, in his Discourse on

the Knowledge of God, describes his own skill and training—the degenerate education

of his own day—as being “neither mantic,

nor sophistic, nor even rhetorical”15—(those being the three natural levels of education).

The Greek word Mantic simply means

prophetic or inspired, oracular, coming from

the other world and not from the resources of the human mind. Instead of Dio’s

Sophistic to describe the operations of the unaided human mind, we use the much rarer

Sophic here, because, as is well known, in time Sophistic came to be identical with

Rhetorical, that is, a pseudothought form

which merely imitated the other two in an

attempt to impress the public. The Mantic is

the equivalent of what Professor

Goodenough designates as “vertical”

Judaism, i.e., the belief in the real and

present operation of divine gifts by which

one receives constant guidance from the

other world, a faith expressed in varying

degrees among such ancient sectaries as the

Hasidim, Karaites, Kabbalists, and the

people of Qumran. 16 The Mantic accepts the other world, or better, other worlds, as part

of our whole experience without which any

true understanding of this life is out of the

question. “It is the Mantic,” says Synesius,

“which supplies the element of hope in our lives by assuring us of the reality of things

beyond.” 17 Mantic, hope, and reality are the key words. What is expected is not as

important as the act of expectation, and so

those who share the Mantic conviction are a

community of believers, regardless of what

it is they expect.

The Sophic, on the other hand, is the

tradition which boasted its cool, critical, objective, naturalistic, and scientific attitude; its Jewish equivalent is what Goodenough

calls the “horizontal” Judaism—scholarly,

bookish, halachic, intellectual, rabbinical.

All religions, as Goodenough observes,

seem to make some such distinction. 18 It is when one seeks to combine or reconcile the

Sophic and the Mantic that trouble begins.

“True reason,” according to

Empedocles, “is either divine or human; the

former is not for discussion, the latter is

discussion” ;19 and recently Charles Kahn has argued that Empedocles himself is two

distinct thinkers, a Sophic and a Mantic, “a

split personality whose two sections are not

united by any essential link.” 20 Since Empedocles’ career is a unique and

impressive attempt to combine Sophic and

Mantic, his case illustrates the important fact that the two are totally incompatible.

Whoever accepts the Sophic attitude must abandon the Mantic, and vice versa. It is the

famous doctrine of Two Ways found among

the Orientals, Greeks, and early Christians—

if you try to compromise between them you

get nowhere, because as one of the Apostolic

Fathers points out, they lead in opposite

directions. Those who share the Mantic hope

of things beyond, whatever those things may

be, are in a very real sense a community of

believers, just as Christians, Jews, and

Moslems form a fellowship of “the People

of the Book,” because of their belief in

inspired books—even though they may not

agree as to which books are the inspired

ones. 21 On the other hand, the Sophic society unitedly rejects the Mantic proposition, and

it too forms a single community, as is

strikingly and amusingly demonstrated in a

1954 study of Professor Enslin, who, while

branding the teachings of Clement of

Alexandria as “rubbish, . . . pathetic nonsense, . . . triple-A nonsense,” 22 at the same time hails Clement as a true gentlemen

and a scholar after his own heart, because,

even though his method produces nothing but

balderdash, it is at least not contaminated by any supernaturalism—here was “a man who

prized brain and insight, who preferred the

voice of reasoned conviction to the braying

of Balaam’s ass. ”23 Better false teaching from a true intellectual than the truth from a prophet. So fiercely loyal and

uncompromising are the Sophic and Mantic

to their own.

It behooves us to consider the Mantic at

this time because in our day its influence

(under the name of eschatology) is being

strangely and wonderfully expanded as the

steady continuance of new manuscript

discoveries calls for radical reevaluation of

ancient religion in general. If Christianity

and Judaism are being basically reappraised at the moment, a reassessment of the pagan

religions cannot be far behind. Indeed, today, bridges are being thrown out in every

direction over what were once unbridgeable

and yawning gulfs between cultures and

religions. Philological cables grow to

ideological spans between early Jewish and

Christian sectarians; Kostas Papaioannou is

bridging the gulf between the Prophets of

Israel and the Greek poets; 24 while F. J. H.

Letters, in describing the religion of

Sophocles, describes something which

approaches the Gospel nearer than we have

supposed.25 New bridges are springing up between the Old Testament and the New, and

between both of them and the Apocrypha,

between various ancient mysteries and

Christian rites, in a complicated network of

interrelationships between Egypt and

Mesopotamia, Canaan, Mycenae, Israel, the

Hittites, and all the Europeans. “Patternism”

now proposes to trace such ties back to

prehistoric times. No ancient religious rites

can be considered as spontaneous and

independent in origin, as not long ago

virtually all were thought to be. 26 We now learn that the cult of the dead was “as

meaningful and urgent for humanist Athens as

for hieratic Egypt, ”27 and are assured by Catholic scholars that “the wine miracle at

Cana was the same as the miracle in the

temple of Dionysus” 28 and that “on the Damascus Chalice, Christ is enthroned

among vine tendrils like Dionysus

himself. ”29 The Dead Sea Scrolls are teaching us as Christians to sit down to

dinner with strange cousins from all over the

East—Essenes, Ebionites, Gnostics,

Therapeutae, even Moslems—whom a few

years ago we turned out of doors as tramps

and aliens: Catholics and Protestants are

now falling over themselves to get to the door to be the first to hail the forlorn

strangers of Qumran as long-lost brothers.

The common element that now makes it

possible to establish all these ties is a

universal Mantic substratum. This can

readily be seen in the enthusiastic

acceptance by pagans, Christians, and Jews

alike of the ancient inspired utterances of the Sibyll. In the Mantic world of the apocrypha,

as of ritual and liturgy, the boundaries

between “Vertical Judaism” and primitive

Christianity become very tenuous indeed, as

do those between even the Christian and

pagan worlds: it was on Mantic grounds that

the early Christians hailed Socrates as one of their own,30 that medieval Christianity made a saint of Vergil, that the early Apologists

praised and quoted the Greek poets as men

of true religious insight or inspiration, and

the Apostolic Fathers before them mingled

Classical and Scriptural texts and histories into one. 31 The idea of a common “Mantic”

heritage, meaningless a few years ago, may

now be seriously considered.

It is high time we realized that there

must have been a solid body of fact behind

the strange unwillingness of Greeks, Jews,

and Egyptians to give up their Mantic

addictions. The whole Mantic tradition is,

from hoary antiquity, disciplined, organized,

institutionalized, and established over the

world. The importance of Delphi and

Eleusis, Olympia, and Delos in the political,

social, religious, and artistic life of Greece testify to the vitality of the ancient Mantic

tradition. It reminds one of the common

denominator of all ancient civilization which

has been consistently overlooked, namely the

image that each great civilization thought of

itself as having been carefully planned in the beginning, all its rites and patterns handed

down from above, a complete, perfect structure, planned in detail from the

beginning as the faithful reflection of a

heavenly prototype32 present in sacred books of great antiquity. Over against this, the

Sophic presented a theory of the evolution of

man from his primitive beginnings, following

“natural laws,” a theory which armies of

dedicated researchers have failed to make

even momentarily watertight to this day; not

that it might not be true, but if the old

förgötten doctrine of the divine plan,

conveyed to men in a primordial revelation

and since confirmed from time to time by

heavenly messengers, were to be given equal

time or even one percent of equal time, the

opposition would be hard-pressed indeed.

The “hierocentric” concept that all good

things have been conveyed to mankind from

above through divinely appointed operations

of holy shrines and persons is immensely

appealing, even in the abstract. But transcending all theory is the fact, obvious

enough to the ancients if not to us, that all the basic institutions of civilization—political,

economic, artistic, literary, military, and

scientific— did take their rise at the Temple.

If their legends were not enough to

remind them of that, all the great societies of antiquity were required to meet at regular

intervals in vast popular assemblies of the

ritual renewal of the corporate life and the

dramatic rehearsal of the stories of how it all came about. The great panegyris or

universal assembly of the entire race for

games, contests, feasts, and liturgy of great

splendor never let the people individually or

collectively forget the other world and their

ties to it. 33 The highest expression of this national eschatology was the Mysteries: only

one who had been initiated into them, says

Pindar, knows the beginning of life.34 Their

“substance,” according to Walter Wili, was the preexistence, the present existence, and

the future existence of things—the full and

complete plot, that is, of the drama of the

universe.35 Without that story, Greek life lost its meaning. “When Christianity put an end to

the Mysteries of Eleusis,” writes Walter

Otto, “Greek life itself seemed to have sunk

into the grave with them.” 36 There was “no deeper meaning” to the mysteries, Rohde

concluded, than the doctrine hen andron hen theon genos, the coexistence of the human race with the divine race; what more could

one ask for than the single divine complex

into which the Mysteries and great

panegyrises brought the two together. These

national disciplines never let the people

forget the other world and their ties to it, and out of them came all the great creative works

of the Greeks. The moral of the mysteries,

says the shrewd Christian Synesius, is

simply that everything is divinely administered, and that every man takes from

the mysteries what he individually is able to; and he quotes the famous saying, “Many are

bearers of the narthex, but few are Bacchae,”

or, as we may put it freely, “Many join the

parade but few are really carried away.” As

might be expected, there were many in the

parade who got things wrong, and many

quacks and pretenders. P. Schmitt points out

that the word mysterion can signify,

depending on its context, “night ramblers,

magicians, bacchants, maenads, mystics,

cough medicine, the secret plan of a king, a

secret hidden cult.” All have one element in

common (if we assume that the cough

medicine is a secret recipe), namely, contact

with a higher, hidden source. The Latin

equivalent mysterium, Schmitt notes, has the basic meaning of to “inspire” or “initiate,”

that is, to introduce someone to something he

could never discover for himself. But the matter dealt with, or what Walter Wili calls

“the substance of the Orphic mysteries,” is

threefold: (1) the Creation and preexistence,

“the genesis of gods, the cosmos, and men,”

(2) the fall of man and its necessary

retribution, and (3) his ultimate destiny and

goal, expressed in the Pythagorean and

Orphic traditions in the doctrine of

transmigration of souls. These will be

readily recognized as the three great

eschatological themes of the past, present,

and future, as they are so clearly set forth in the Egyptian Book of the Dead. One of the

strange phenomena of Greek life was the

way the “old, essentially Greek impulses”37

would revive from time to time, “ein uraltes Erbgut neu belebt.” 38 The most enlightened Greeks and Romans were all initiates to the

Mysteries; the Greeks were as mercilessly

critical of humbug as the French, and all of

their writings that have reached us have been screened by rationalistic pagan and Christian

schoolmen. It is indeed remarkable that in all the literature we fail to find any derogatory

remark or witticism about the Mysteries. 39

Even more remarkable is that none of a host

of outspoken and gossipy writers, hungry for

sensational talk, has ever divulged the

secrets of the Mysteries. We are very much

mistaken, Otto reminds us, if we think for a

moment that we can run the Mysteries to

ground simply by the use of modern

psychology and philology: such great things

are not to be so cheaply had, and we will

never know just what took place in the

Mysteries. 40

The headquarters of the Mysteries were

also the great assembly places, the economy

of all the mysteries and the panegyrises

being inextricably interwoven. Musaeus, for

example, the high priest of Delphi, was also

director of the Eleusinian Mysteries, the author of a great creation hymn, and the

founder of the first academy. 41 He wrote oracular poems and the Theogony. The

Theogony is in the tradition of the Creation Hymn, eschatological and cosmic in its sweep. The mark of divinity in all poetry,

according to Aristotle, is its capacity for

dealing with things in their universal aspect.

The Creation Hymn deserves special

mention because it was the ancient and

original office of the Muses to sing that

hymn, the great archetype of all music and

verse. All fields of knowledge belong to the

Muses, the wise women, the purveyors— not

the authors—of divine revelation; the

schools never förgöt their origin as holy

oracular shrines of the Muses with their

sacred temples, images (mostly memorial

busts of great teachers), lecture halls,

grottoes, walks, groves, and libraries. A

center of learning was a Musaeon, and the Muses acted as intermediaries between the

divine and the human in all nine fields of

learning; the Muses were not worshipped

save as agents of gods. They were the

archaic oracular women whom we find all

over the ancient world, whose classic

representative is the Sibyll herself. 42 Dio Chrysostom tells how the Seven Wise Men

—those true Sophoi of which the rest were all but imitators, mere Sophists—used to

meet at Delphi to unite their wisdom for the

help of the human race, imparting of their

knowledge to all who came to consult the

oracles there. 43 In that day it was simply inconceivable that wisdom could be

conveyed to the race anywhere but at the

properly appointed holy shrine. The ideas

which we designate as Mantic were thus

institutionalized for the ancients—in the

panegyris, the Mysteries, and the schools—

to a degree which we can hardly imagine.

For them it was easy to conceive of the

heavenly order as real, since one had

reminders of it all around one.44 Even when the Mantic order was challenged, it was

possible to point to an argument in its favor

that the rationalists have never been able to

answer—the argument of creativity.

In his lost Hymn to Zeus, Pindar tells how God in the beginning did not consider

his creation complete until he had also

created a voice to proclaim it (the same idea

exactly is presented in the Shabako stone,

which may be the oldest surviving Egyptian

document), specifically to proclaim his glory

by reciting the works of the Creation.45 The great prototype of all Music and Verse is

thus the Creation Hymn, just as the prototype of all creative human activity in art and

science is the creation itself. The Egyptians

were fairly obsessed with the idea that in

creating anything, a man was doing the work of God; creation could not have any other

than a divine source or be anything but a

divine activity. The Devil cannot create; he

can only destroy. He is Apollyon, the Destroyer, and nothing else.

In the early times there was a common

Mantic meeting ground of Christian and non-

Christian, just as in later times the common

meeting ground was exclusively Sophic.

Everybody agrees today that the

distinguishing characteristic of the Early

Christians was their vivid apocalyptic

expectations. Exactly what these

expectations were has ever been a subject of

controversy and endless discussion. But

again we must insist, though we do not know

and the Christians themselves did not know

just what great things were ahead, one thing

was certain: there were great things ahead!

Once we know that the prize is awaiting us

“with a firm assurance,” then when and where we shall get it, and even what it is,

become secondary considerations—mere

details. It was so with Plato. Along with the

Bible, it is Plato who emerges in

Whitehead’s last analysis as supremely

satisfying—and for the same reason. Plato

always leaves the door open; he remains as a

good Greek should and as Solon the Wise

did, “forever a child,” aiei didaskomenos—

ever learning—naive, innocent, always

expecting. That would account for the fact

that, try as we will, we cannot view things

neutrally; we are not impartial observers, as the Sophoi claimed to be. When we applaud whatever is good and beautiful, it is not

blind, accidental force that we are

applauding (a mindless operation is just as

willing to produce a bad thing as a good

one); it is something good. We bestow our

approval and disapproval upon all we see

about us—how could that be if things just happen? 46

The Greeks were greatly impressed by

the fact, attested by long experience, that

even the greatest genius cannot create at

will. 47 The moments of genuine creativity are simply not within human control, all that

is within human control being what Plato calls mere imitation, i.e., something that can be taught—for to learn is simply to imitate.48

Even when they create by inspiration,

however, humans know that the result is but a

poor reflection of the divine original. The

greater the artist, in fact, the more frustrated he feels. 49 “Wise is he who knows much by nature but, when men have merely studied

and learned their knowledge, they are

turbulent and intemperate of tongue, even as

a pair of crows chattering against the divine

bird of Zeus. ”50 If creation were an

intellectual accomplishment, an act of human intellect or will, that would not be the case.

Creation is not of this world; a place of

imitation at best “in the domain of art has

apparently but a small opinion of the earthly

counterparts of the celestial originals.” 51

They are literally worlds apart; the heavenly

originals are no mere human ideas, but, as

far as we are aware of them, things actually

remembered from another world. For Plato,

what we recognized here as good, true, and

beautiful is but a dim recollection of what

we once saw in another and better world.

That is Plato’s doctrine of anamnesis.

The greatest Greeks were determined

defenders of the Mantic against the Sophic,

as we shall see later. Though not the best

argument for the Mantic, the first that

confronts us is the striking fact, of which the Greeks themselves are keenly aware, that it

is precisely the greatest, most original, most

productive “geniale,” of their number who insist most emphatically upon man’s

dependence on light from above. If it had

been any but the greatest poets (Pindar),

philosphers (Aristotle, Plato), scientists

(Eratosthenes), or dramatists (all of them),

who preached the complete dependence of

the creative mind on direct inspiration from

above, we could brush the doctrine aside as

speculation or pretense (and indeed, many a

minor poet and orator, imitating the great

ones, pretended to be inspired and made a show of it); 52 but we cannot treat with condescension or contempt, regardless of

our education, the deepest convictions of the

very men who have given us the best we

have. If anybody knows what he is talking

about, these men should, and they are not

vague or equivocal regarding the reality of

the world. In his study of the Muses, Walter

Otto concludes that for the Greeks “the

whole work of the artist is to create,” and that “creation is in the last analysis simply

revelation (Schopfung im Grunde eine

Offenbarung ist).” Those who have had to

acquire their art by study and learning alone, Pindar reminds us, “can never be anything

but a flock of crows, jealously squawking

against the divine bird of Zeus.” 53 Poesis means creation, and is only true poetry to the extent that it is creation and not imitation.

The dismal failure of a million zealous and

often highly intelligent imitators to produce

an inspiring (and therefore inspired) poem or

anything else truly original proves that we

have here something totally beyond human

ken, while those who do create are

unanimous in reporting that the process is

something equally out of their control. The power to create is something not only

completely beyond the comprehension of the

uninspired, but equally beyond the control of

those who possess it: in the moment of creation they are seized with a divine frenzy, shaken, and even frightened.54

For the experience of creation, whether

in great calm or unbearable excitement, is a

profoundly religious experience. Rudolf Otto

showed that there is a thing which can be

broken down into no emotional or

psychological elements beyond itself, and

that is das Heilige, “the numinous,” that which we call holy and cannot define beyond

calling it holy. As Otto says, this fundamental requisite in the recognition of the Holy is that it comes upon us but is never self-induced. It is a holy thing, and the poet, to that degree to which he is truly a poet, is an oracle and a

prophet. In music and poetry “the earliest

fragments are priestly incantations; . . . the first poets, then, are the priests.” 55

Conversely, Plutarch knows that the old

inspiration is passing away when the oracles

start to speak in prose instead of verse. 56

The creator of the Greek epic, ode, and

drama is frankly a prophet and preacher of

righteousness, an inspired man; even

historians and orators are expected to play

the Mantic role: the sane and enlightened

Thucydides has baffled the critics by

affecting the oracular style of Aeschylus,57

and it remains an open question just how

seriously the prayers and incantations of the

orators are to be taken.

None is more insistent on the need for

revelation than Plato. Plato was the great

champion of the Mantic. He banned Homer

from his model state not, as the Sophists did, because he was inspired (they made fun of

everything in Homer that was not strictly

rational according to their way of thinking),

but because with his inspiration he mingled

his own human contribution, or, as Plato puts

it, he mixed mere imitation with

inspiration. 58 For Plato, whatever is not inspired can only be mere imitation. True

knowledge comes to the race only through

men who prove their inspiration “when they

say many great things without knowing what

they say.” 59 Such are the poets: “I know that they do what they do not by any intelligence

of their own, but by a special nature, and

inspiration such as holy prophets and oracles

have, for they too speak many fine and

wonderful things without knowing what they

are saying.” 60 The words of such men,

“inspired from heaven,” are, Plato insists,

the only fit instruction for the youth. 61 His own favorite poet was Pindar, one of those

poets “of heavenly gifts,” who taught that the human mind is blind when it attempts to find

the path unaided by its own cleverness.62

“Whoever thinks,” says Plato, “that skill

alone will make a good poet; . . . [he] will

never attain perfection, but be surpassed by

the inspired madmen.” 63 Both Plato and Aristotle, according to Jaeger, “placed

inspiration above reason and moral insight . .

. because it comes from God”—for while

reason is far from infallible, “the sureness of inspiration, on the other hand, is like

lightning. ”64 Whoever receives inspiration must be both ritually and morally pure “like

an instrument,” says Plutarch, “prepared and

fair-sounding. ”65 It was both as a Platonist and as a Christian that Justin Martyr

declared: “Neither by nature nor by any

human skill is it possible for men to know

such great and holy things; but only by a gift that descends from above upon holy men

from time to time, who need no training in

speech or skill in controversy and argument,

but only to keep themselves pure by the

power of the Holy Spirit so that the divine

plectrum . . . can express itself through them as on the strings of a lyre.” 66

This sort of thing suggests a kind of pentecostal ecstasy to outsiders—something

like Nietzsche’s dionysischer Geist; and indeed when the less gifted tried, as

inevitably they would, to imitate divine

obsession or to induce it by artificial means, the result was a degenerate form of the

Mysteries, which did much to discredit the

genuinely Mantic. 67 The Corybantic orgies are not Mantic—quite the opposite; they

break the first rule of inspiration, as Manetho explains it, that nothing can be forced; it is not within human authority to command or

control revelation. We can make ourselves

fit to receive it (and a favorite image both of the early Christian writers and the Greeks

was that of the musical instrument properly

tuned and prepared for God to play upon it

when and as He—and only He—chose to do so), but we cannot produce it at will. What

all the descriptions of the phenomena of

inspiration from Plato to Sappho amount to is that the creative person is himself

completely at a loss to account for how he

does it, while to imitate it is a pitiful device indeed. 68 So vivid and real is the Greek faith in inspiration that students are now

attempting to explain it in terms of

shamanism:69 but the shaman is a false prophet precisely because he seeks to induce

an ecstatic experience by artificial means

over which he presumes to exercise control.

It is when they descend to such devices that

such seekers of inspiration as Empedocles,

Pythagoras, and Apollonius are rightly

charged with quackery and assume the guise

of the shaman.

In spite of the danger of easy abuses and

even easier misunderstanding in the realm of

the Mantic, Plato showed an increasing

partiality to the Mantic over the Sophic.

“When I was young,” he has Socrates say, “I

was fanatically devoted to the intellectual quest which they call natural science. Filled

with pride and youthful conceit

(hyperphanos), I was convinced that I could know the reason for everything. . . . I was

always experimenting to discover the secrets

of nature and life.” 70 He was convinced, as was Socrates, “that no one need look any

farther than science for the answers to

everything.” That is the “Sophic” state of

mind clearly set forth. Then it was, he says,

that he read the passage that completely

changed his point of view: “There is a mind

that orders things and causes all things to

be.” 71 The idea electrified him: “Somehow it seemed to me just right, that idea that there

must be a mind responsible for everything.”

So he turned from the majority to join a very

small minority. “Shall we say,” he asks in

discussing the nature of the earth, “that God

the Creator made it? Or would you prefer the

teaching and language that everybody follows today—that it all came about simply

by spontaneous cause and without any

intelligence?” 72 Here we have the basic dichotomy: on the one hand, things just

happen—the physis holds in itself the

explanation for everything; on the other hand, things do not just happen. Note well that in Plato’s day public opinion was all on the

side of the former.

At the end of his life Socrates explained

that he had taken the course he had through

the years “because, as I said, the way was

shown me by God through oracles and

dreams and by whatever other means divine

providence directs the actions of men. ”73 He was dead serious about this. “Listen to a tale which you consider a myth,” he tells his

intellectual friends, “but which I believe to

be true.” Then he tells of the next world and

its judgments and concludes, “This,

Callicles, is what I have heard, and I believe it to be true. . . . In a word, whatever

characteristics a man’s body presented in

this life, these remain visible in death. . . .

Now my concern is how I may present my

soul to the judge in its healthiest

condition.” 74 The next world and the judgment are his guiding light. “But you,” he

says to his Sophist friends, “the three of you, you and Polus and Gorgias, the wisest

[sophoteroi] of all the Greeks alive at this moment [and they would see no sarcasm in

this] can’t demonstrate the necessity of living any other life than this earthly one.” 75 When Socrates asks the intellectual Meletus, who

is accusing him of sacrilege and calling for

the death penalty, “Do you believe that the sun and moon are gods as lots of people

do?” the indignant Meletus replies, “Of

course not! The sun is just a stone and the

moon is a piece of earth.” Then Socrates,

who may well have shared Meletus’s opinions on astronomy, points out to him that

because he and his friends think that

everything can be explained by such glib and confident naturalism they must

necessarily fear death, as Socrates himself

does not. 76 For Meletus and the three Sophists there is nothing beyond this life; for Socrates, what is beyond is all that is really important.

What irony that the people whom

Socrates thus opposed all of his life, and

who brought about his death, should ever

after proclaim him as their patron saint! Now

professors of philosophy brush aside

Socrates’ own solemn profession of faith as

sarcasm or gentle irony, so that they can

maintain that he was put to death by

reactionary religionists instead of

enlightened professors. But to the charge of

atheism he emphatically pleads not guilty:

How, he asks, can he be a religious innovator and trouble-making sectarian if, as

they also say, he is antireligious? How can

he be guilty of believing in false gods if, as they say, he believes in no god?77 What is most clearly brought out at the trial is not that Socrates believes like others, for he does

not, but that he does believe, and that for his faith he is willing to give his life. 78 If there is anything Socrates was not, it was a barefoot liberal blasting away at

conventional beliefs. What he blasted was

conventional un belief. Plato is simply appalled at the Athenians’ lack of belief in

anything, based on the comforting popular

creed that science knows all the answers and

that the important thing in religion is to go

along with the group. This was the safe,

conventional, respectable creed of educated

Athenians, and Plato despised it. In the Crito Socrates points out that his colleagues know

even less than he does about things, since they think they know the answers while he at

least is aware of his ignorance; but of two

things he is convinced, (1) that the important questions of life are eschatological ones and

(2) that these can be answered only by

revelation. 79

Socrates never found the revelation for

which he was seeking, and he remained a

seeker to the end of his days. Only a believer would have carried on the search, as Eduard

Meyer’s Egyptians did “with such energy

and persistence.” His credo is only a

preparatory one, but it is nonetheless

emphatic and explicit: he believes, namely,

that the way is still unexplored and the doors still remain open and the means have been

provided to attain to the only knowledge that

counts; and as long as such is the case, no

one is excused from pressing the search.

Contrary to this position is the maxim of the

fourth century that it is better not to believe anything than to differ from them in slightest point of doctrine. The accent was not on faith but on conformity—the discovery of

nonconformity in the Church is more

important, says St. Augustine, than the

discovery of truth. It was quite the opposite

in the Primitive Church, whose converts

were all made among people with a Mantic

inclination, that is, those who believed

something already. Much of Christ’s

discourse in the New Testament is addressed

to schoolmen, the Scribes and Pharisees,

who apparently often consulted with him,

and yet though he converted farmers and

soldiers, taxgatherers, fishermen, harlots,

and princes, there is no recorded instance of

his ever converting one of the Doctors. In the Primitive Church one is expected to knock

before the door is open, ask before he receives, and seek before he finds. To

believe in Christ you had to believe something in the first place: the sick did not have to make Peter’s confession before they

were healed, but they did have to have faith.

The people who would not believe in Jesus

believed in nothing—they said they believed

in the prophets, but they did not: if they

believed in the prophets, in the scriptures, in Moses, or in God, they would believe in

Christ—but they do not. The greatest

Christian convert was a man who believed

all the wrong things about Christ—it was not what he believed, but his capacity for faith

that made Saul of Tarsus eligible for

immediate enlightenment.

Saul’s case would seem to indicate that

it is more desirable to have faith in false

propositions than to have no faith at all.

Actually one cannot have faith in a false

proposition, since one cannot have faith in a

proposition at all. One does not have faith in

propositions, creeds, or institutions, to which one is merely loyal. One has faith in

God alone—all else is subject to change

without notice. Faith does not seek security

by boxing itself in with definite and binding

creeds, as did the Doctors of the Church in a

time of desperate uncertainty and insecurity.

One does not cling to faith but to substitutes for faith: drowning men cling to things, but

men of faith are not desperate and don’t cling to anything. Professor Gaylord Simpson

likes to cite the case of Santa Claus as

providing the futility of all faith. 80 But has belief in Santa Claus ever closed the door to

knowledge as loyalty to a scientific credo so

often has? Is it better for a child to believe in Santa Claus with the understanding that

someday he is going to revise his views than

for him to be taught, as some professors’

children are, only what is scientifically

correct from infancy, so that he will never,

never have to revise his views on anything and thus go through life being always right

about everything? Which course is more

liable to lead to disaster, the open-ended

Santa Claus, or the ingrained illusion of

infallibility?

Did the pagans, then, have faith in true

principles? No more than the Christians.

Jesus made it perfectly clear that he

considered faith to be the rarest thing on

earth. The Greeks did not have true faith:

Plato was appalled by the lack of faith

among his fellow Athenians, and their

preference instead for a religion of popular

superstitions and smug conventional piety—

the belief that righteousness consists in going to church, saluting the flag, and keeping

one’s nose clean. 81 Thucydides’ History is a terrible commentary on the fate of a

generation that had lost its faith, and the

whole literature of the following century is

one long and melancholy footnote to that commentary. It is true that the old religion

had long been weak and ailing and the

oracles very feeble indeed, 82 yet as Plato feels so keenly, it was the only tie men had

with the other world, and it did have sacral

foundations worthy of respect.83 And now comes a strange turn of events: within the

last few years a rich outpouring of newly

discovered documents has so broadened the

ancient religious community of East and

West as to embrace heretofore aloof and

incompatible sects in a single fold. And

within that fold Christianity finds itself

rubbing shoulders not only with desert

sectarians and pagan mystics but with

something very like Plato’s inspired

madmen. 84 It would seem now that Greek my thology is not the key to Greek religion, but a red herring: it was the Christian apologists,

laboring the safe and obvious, who

established the image of Greek religion as the Night Life of the Gods. No, the Greeks

did not have the true religion: even Plato

didn’t, and he knew he didn’t. His Socrates

is a seeker, convinced as he is that true

enlightenment can come only by revelation.

II. The Sophic Scaffolding: The

Rise and Prosperity of the Sophic

The beginning of the sixth century B.C.

is what Karl Jaspers calls the “Axial

Period” in human history.85 The significance, according to Jaspers, was first noted by

Lasaulx, who in 1851 wrote: “It cannot

possibly be an accident that, six-hundred

years before Christ, Zarathustra in Persia,

Gautama Buddha in India, Confucius in

China, the prophets in Israel, King Numa in

Rome and the first philosophers—Ionians,

Dorians, and Eleatics—in Hellas, all made

their appearance pretty well simultaneously as reformers of the national religion.” 86 A strange movement of the spirit passed

through all civilized peoples. The time was

marked by a series of popular revolutions

which everywhere saw the final overthrow

of the old sacral kingship; the great social

crises and world upheavals of the early

second and middle first millennia B.C. had

dealt shattering blows to the old sacral

order, and the sixth century saw the

completion of the process with what we

might call the great Sophic revolution. With

the passing of the priestkings, people

everywhere found themselves looking for

some other principle of authority for the

ordering of society; with oracles silent and

priestly lines extinct, who would have the

final word? Where could men turn for the

voice of authority? What could now

command their loyalty?

For a time the tyrants tried their hand at governing the world; there is everywhere a

sort of transitional period of tyrants, able

and often even idealistic men, whose right to

rule rested neither on hereditary office,

popular election, nor divine inspiration but

on their wits alone. Many a tyrant tried to

legalize his position by religious fictions and ritual trickery—for the only alternative to

government by divine sanction seemed to be

brute power alone. It was the Greeks who

decided to go to the root of the baffling

problem of who has a right to govern his

fellows: that question became the theme of

much of their most enthusiastic discussion

and profound research in even more

significant phenomena than the tyrants in the

appearance of the so-called Seven Wise

Men. “The sixth century, the most critical

period in the mental development of the

Greeks, came to be known afterwards as the

age of Seven Sages.” 87 These were the original Sophoi, from whom we have taken our word Sophic. To the ancient mind the apex of human success, the highest prize to

which any man could attain, was to be a

Sophos, one of those heroes of the mind, typified by the Seven Sages, who, after

giving wise laws and examples to their own

cities, wandered free of earthly passions and

attachments through the universe, selfless

and aloof, as spectators of God’s works,

seeking only knowledge and carrying with

them the healing blessing of true wisdom,

especially of statesmanship, for all who

sought or needed it. Hailed by adoring

multitudes—who often saw the aura of

divinity around them—humbly petitioned by

great cities and magnificent potentates, these incorruptible wise men represented the

pinnacle of real human attainment. They

represent indeed the peak of human

excellence, but for all that they are purely human—that is their significance. Like the

tyrants, the Sophoi represent a sort of experimental phase; they were an attempt at

compromise between the Mantic and Sophic

on the principle that a very high order of

human wisdom has something divine about

it, making the true Sophos the equivalent of an inspired leader. But the Sophoi had no successors—only imitators, the notorious

Sophists, a very different order of men. What

set the Sophoi apart from their fellows was not a peculiar type of wisdom but simply a higher degree of intelligence—they had an

extra large amount of what everybody has

more or less of, but that was all. They lay no claim to Mantic powers—Pythagoras

himself, the most “Mantic” wise man of his

time, was charged with quackery for trying

to preempt the glory of a prophet instead of

being satisfied to shine as a thinker. For all

the veneration they received from a world yearning for guidance and starved for the

comfort of the Mantic order, the Seven Wise

Men represent a true Sophic revolution, a

deliberate renunciation of the Mantic. By

their own confession their complete

humanity is their glory and their tragedy.

Such is the gospel of Solon, who speaks

for them all. His earthly wisdom was of the

highest order, but what does he see beyond?

Nothing, as the typical Solonian utterances

make clear: “At every turn the mind of the

immortals is hid from men. . . . Like gaping

fools we amuse ourselves with empty

dreams. ”88 The best anyone can hope for from life is the contentment of possessing

children, horses, dogs, and good friends, and

“a stomach, lungs, and feet that cause him a

minimum of trouble; . . . and as a man gets

older his speech and intelligence

progressively fail him, and if he manages to

reach old age intact, it is high time for him to embrace death.” 89 In all this there is no expectation but earthly expectation—it is

good, it is noble, it is heroic, but it is all there is. The Mantic has become little more

than a figure of speech: “One man receives

from the Olympian Muses the gift of that

inspired sophia that men yearn for, and another from Apollo the mantic gift of

prophecy.” 90 Note the conjunction of mantic and sophia—but to what purpose? For all that, “no man knows at the beginning of an

enterprise how it is going to turn out,” and

“no divination or religious rites can help a

bit to avert what is going to happen (ta

morsima).” 91 In the end the Mantic is unavailing; a man’s only comfort and guide

is his own common sense.

Such is the mature mind of the Sophic,

bravely renouncing the wonders of the

Mantic because they are just too good to be

true. I once reviewed a book by a historian who was convinced that any historical

account of events depicted as spectacular,

picturesque, or dramatic must necessarily be

a fabrication—this, for him, was the measure

of sound, safe, conservative scholarship.

Actually, the Sophic mind never seems to be

completely reconciled to the negative

doctrine in which it glories; one never fails

to detect in the sermons of the atheist a

peevish and bitter undertone, a vindictive

satisfaction in putting the Mantic in its place, a tendency to gloat over the discomfiture of

the believer. This is another sign of the basic Sophic insecurity, for to one who really

believed that the sum total of all experience

was zero it could not make the slightest

difference what other people might think on

the subject, and nothing could concern him

less than the fond illusions of his fellows.

Yet your Sophic thinker spends most of his

time and energy in preachments, denouncing such illusions. Even more important in the

history of thought than the tyrant and the

Sophoi who tried, each in his way, to

provide a satisfactory substitute for heavenly guidance in the affairs of men, was the

emergence of real science in Ionia at the

same time.

The most serious defect of the Mantic,

the standard objection to it in every age, is

that it does not lend itself to any kind of

control—“the Spirit bloweth where it

listeth”; it does not wait upon human

convenience, nor do its manifestations

comply with human expectations. Its

operations are always surprising—they

always catch men off guard. And here,

incidentally, we have another indication that

the Mantic and not the Sophic holds the key

to the real order of things, for reality, as C.

S. Lewis notes, “besides being complicated .

. . is usually odd: it is not neat, is not what you expect. . . . Reality, in fact, is usually something you could not have guessed. That

is one of the reasons I believe Christianity. It is a religion you could not have guessed. If it offered us just the kind of universe we had

always expected, I should feel we were

making it up. . . . So let us leave behind all these boys’ philosophies—these over-simple

answers. ”92 This defense of the Mantic position might well be taken by a Sophic

thinker as an attack on it, as an admission

that the Mantic is uncontrollable,

incalculable, and full of imponderables, as

indeed it is. The normal reaction to real

heavenly manifestation, whether to the

prophets of old, Zacharias in the Temple,

Mary at home, the shepherd in the fields, or

the Apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration,

is to be amazed and “sore afraid”—all must

be assured by the divine messenger that there

is nothing to be afraid of, that this is a joyful and not an appalling event.

Whatever its correspondence to reality,

such a state of things can only be deplorable

to the neat and methodical world of science,

and it is understandable that in Miletus, at

the time when people were everywhere

dissatisfied with a Mantic order which had

lost much of its vitality and been discredited by the Corybantic excesses of irresponsible

sectarians, certain clever men should have

decided to study things with the troublesome

Mantic left out. The other world cannot be

brought into the laboratory to be weighed

and measured; it cannot figure in any set

calculations because of its unpredictability.

Then why not simply leave it out of our

experiments and formulas and go along

without it? Why not study this world with the

other world left out, if only to see where it

will get us? It was proposed to confine all

study to matter that can be managed and situations that can be controlled, i.e., to the physis, the tangible, visible, measurable world, as if it were all that existed or at least all that could really be known. Thus

science became Science when it renounced

eschatology: “For scientific procedure,”

write Courrant and Robbins, “it is important

to discard elements of [a] meta physical character. . . . To renounce the goal of . . .

knowing the ‘ultimate truth,’ of unravelling

the innermost essence of the world, may be a

psychological hardship for naive enthusiasts,

but in fact it was one of the most fruitful

turns in modern thinking.” Yet after having

embraced this principle with ardor, the naive

enthusiasts of Ionia were soon to be found,

as modern scientists are, zealously holding

forth on no less a theme than “the innermost

essence of the world”93—which is what the scientist is seeking to discover more than

anyone else. “Here we are,” cries an eminent contemporary scientist, “and we had better

find some meaning or invent one for

ourselves so that we have some definite

mission to lend dignity to our life. If there is a meaning, it obviously lies somewhere in

the vast areas of biology which are still

unknown to us, and we should have faith that

it is at least worth looking for by the usual

rational experimental approach.” 94 Has he förgötten that science, to be scientific, must renounce all that sort of nonsense? To be

effective science must work in closed

systems, always assuming that the scientist,

when he sets up his experiment, is taking all

relevant factors into consideration. When the

scientist leaves his closed system and starts

talking in eschatological terms he is

exceeding his authority, going beyond the

bounds which science proudly sets for all

who would play the game according to her

rules. Only faith enjoys the luxury of being open-ended. But is it a luxury? Who is to say

what unknown factors may not be highly

relevant to any situation? It is not for science, having shut itself in the impregnable castle of sensory experience and having

raised the drawbridge against all evil

premonitions from without to suggest picnics

in the countryside and exploring in the

woods. If we decide to treat the physis as all there is, then of course we need look no

farther than physis itself for the explanation of everything; and the physis is a closed system—no matter how large it may be, it is

still perfectly complete and self-contained:

By turning from Mantic to Sophic we have

tidied up our calculations, but at the price of putting ourselves in a box, as Heraclitus was

quick to point out to the Ionian physicists.

Heraclitus is known to the world as ho

skoteinos which, as Sophocles uses the

word, does not mean “the obscure,” but rather “the recalcitrant,” “the gloomy one,”

the wetblanket, the man who throws cold

water on things. 95 He earned the title by asking his scientific friends to consider,

before they began making their pontifical

statements about things, just how reliable the human organism is as a gatherer and

interpreter of information. Men’s eyes and

ears are, to say the least, unreliable

instruments, and if their senses are feeble,

their interpretive faculties are even more so: all men are more or less asleep, and never

completely sober. Mere information

(polymathia) is pointless for all the pride we take in it; the Sophoi have done with God once for all—but they are always talking

about him; they are seeking the same

objective as religion—to explain everything.

And what are their chances of succeeding?

What about the objects they observe? They

are always changing, even while they seek to limit and define them—“all things flow. . . .

You can’t step into the same river twice.” 96

The observer’s own position is purely

relative, yet everything depends on the way

you are facing. 97 So what hope have we for real knowledge? Revelation, says

Heraclitus: “A man should listen to the

spirits [ daimones, the same word is used by Socrates]98 as a child to an adult”; 99 “our individual minds are pretty dull, but through

the ages there exists an unmistakable

consensus of humanity about things, an ethos

which is not the product of reason but of

revelation.” 100 There is a common divine logos in which we all have a share, and that

is the one thing we can be really sure of, “the one criterion of truth.” 101

By saying such things Heraclitus made

himself a controversial and unpopular figure.

The general public, at its wit’s end for moral and intellectual guidance, embraced the new

gospel with open arms. Much the same eager

greeting awaited Darwin’s gospel, which

gave the Victorians what they most needed, a

genuine eschatology without Mantic

contamination. The whole appeal of

Darwinism lay in its thoroughgoing

protology and eschatology—it was a

universal hypothesis that answered all the

questions of life. Ionian physics also quickly took eschatological form, its proponents

dogmatically holding forth on the one quality or property or element that could, like

evolution later, explain the creation and all

subsequent phenomena. And this new

eschatology met with the same sensational

success in Periclean Athens that Darwinism

did in Victorian England. Its chief exponent

was Anaxagoras, who “believed,” according

to one of his disciples, “that theoria—

scientific investigation—was the purpose of life, . . . while Heraclitus believed that the purpose of life was to have joy

(euarestēsis). ” 102

It was, as might be expected, the

younger generation at Athens that hailed the

new scientific emancipation from the hoary

past with the greatest glee. The kids

suddenly knew all the answers. We have

already seen that Socrates admitted to some

youthful conceit (hyperphanos) in his early attachment to the Sophic. The Sophists,

popularizers of science and common sense,

“attacked every illusion and every tradition

in the name of truth, clarity, objectivity,

consistency, and neatness in thinking and

speech.” Here was something that was easy

to understand, flattering to the intellect, and liberating to the conscience. The public ate it up. The basic proposition, clearly and

forthrightly stated by Hippocrates, is that

there is nothing supernatural, the elements of which things are made being sufficient to

explain all phenomena.103 Implicit in all the Sophist teaching, as Schmid points out, was

a basic atheism which, as far as the general

public was concerned, infallibly became the

main issue. Smart people were expected to

dismantle and debunk all old beliefs in the

name of a fresh, modern, emancipated

morality: the broad-minded Hippias prefers

“the frank and straightforward Achilles” to

“the wily and false Odysseus”; 104 Protagoras made the devastating discovery that the

opening lines of the Iliad are not a prayer at all, being in the imperative. So what? snorts

Aristotle, any fool can see that it is a

prayer!105 The faith of many was shaken by the scandalous disclosure that Crete has one

hundred cities in the Iliad and only ninety in the Odyssey and that God who is said to see everything in the Iliad has to send out

messengers in the Odyssey to report to him.106 The great liberals boil with indignation at the injustice and inhumanity

with which a god kills innocent mules and

dogs in wartime. This sort of thing,

presented with clever rhetoric, was glorious

and heady stuff for the youth of Athens.

In the year that Plato was born,

Aristophanes, a kid from the country,

produced his first play, a biting satire on the Athenian youth and the new education that

was making them what they were: “Their

general lack of reverence disgusted him.

They struck him as dreadfully ignorant of

Homer and good literature. . . . Also they

were full of strange information, and

sometimes of shocking beliefs and

disbeliefs. ”107 Pericles had declared,

“Athens needs no Homer to praise her”; the

city, J. B. Bury says, “enshrined the worldly

wisdom of men who stood wholly aloof from

mystic excitements and sought for no revelation, in the fiction of the Seven

Sages.” 108 It was Anaxagoras the physicist, according to Plutarch, who taught Pericles

“to despise all the superstitious fears which

the awe-inspiring signs in the heavens arouse

in those who are ignorant of the real causes

of such things.” 109 And it was just this attitude of Pericles, Plato avers, that laid the foundation for the ruin of Athens. 110 Plato rejected Homer as the perfect teacher for

exactly the opposite reason that Pericles and

the Sophists did—for them the poet was not

civilized enough, for Plato he had too much

of human cleverness. 111 Plutarch tells how the doctors eagerly sought for the few errors

and contradictions to be found in Homer,

while completely ignoring his matchless

qualities of greatness. Why? Because the

Sophic cannot tolerate the Mantic. Dionysius

Halicarnassus says the rationalist

philosophers “ridicule all the epiphanies of the Gods”; all that was now so much old

baggage, dead wood of the past. The issue is

clearly drawn between two antithetical and

hostile views of life. We have seen that both

Socrates and Plato in their youth were

enthusiastic followers of the new learning

upon which both later turned their backs.

What is plain is that there is in the literature of the Golden Age a strong tension, never

sufficiently studied, between the Sophic and

the Mantic: the men of genius are

consciously embattled against their rivals

and imitators whose special skill is in

beguiling the public. Socrates lost his life in the battle, and he confidently predicted that

his teaching had no more chance of winning

out in competition with the delightfully

packaged and skillfully advertised product

of the Sophists than the sound prescriptions

of a good doctor would have in competition

with a quack who prescribed nothing but candy for his child patients.

One of the most moving documents of

the confrontation of the Mantic and the

Sophic at Athens is a noble tragedy which

has received rough treatment at the hands of

the critics (although some think it is the

greatest drama ever written). “Strange to

say,” comments Sandys, “at the presentation

of the Oedipus Tyrannus, Sophocles was defeated by a minor poet. ”112 There must have been a reason, and it must be the same

reason for which the present critics of

Sophocles denounced the play, in spite of its

transcendent genius, as a badly botched job

from the rational and moral standpoint. The

unpardonable defect of the Oedipus

Tyrannus is that in this titanic showdown between the Sophic and the Mantic, it is the

Mantic that wins. Hence the play is

denounced as a moral fiasco. And so, like

the ancient critics, the present critics of Sophocles—Kitto, Bowra, Sheppard, and

Letters113—all give it up as a hopeless impasse. To quote one of them: “Whatever

were Oedipus’s defects, they did not justify his fate. . . . They [the gods] have not only

yoked the cosmological law to their own

designs, but decreed their victim neither

compensation nor hope. . . . We must believe

the gods just, but the play does not help us to see that they are.” 114

“Oedipus is the victim of Fate. . . . His

doings, moods, and character in the drama

cannot make matters either better or worse. .

. . For us the deeper problem is thereby

made only more acute. . . . Sophocles hints at no answer in the Tyrannus. ” 115 That is the way it looked to Oedipus too—because he

was a Sophist. In this play the Sophic and

Mantic let loose with tremendous salvos at

each other, and because the Mantic wins, the

critics agree that the play is morally and rationally bankrupt. Was Sophocles a fool?

No, but he was a priest and patron of

Aesculapius, who took his calling seriously

and believed as did Plato in inspired

utterance. This play is one of his

impassioned sermons specifically against the

shallowness of the brilliant intellectuals that gathered around Anaxagoras at Pericles’

house after the show.

Oedipus had killed his father and

married his mother—but quite innocently. As

Letters points out, he had committed no

crime by Athenian law; he was not “guilty,”

but he was “polluted.” 116 He is under a curse brought on, as Aristotle notes, by a mistake,

and the critics are quick to point out (as the chorus does in the play) that his mistake

consists simply in being an erring human

being—we are all in the same case. But a

way of escape and the redemption is open if

we are ready to accept it; we can be cleansed of our pollution if we can bring

ourselves to repent and submit to certain

ministrations that we cannot perform for

ourselves. This Oedipus will not do. That is

his responsibility, and the tragedy is of his

own making. In the speech that opens the

drama, Oedipus tells us that for sixteen years everybody has been telling him that he is

perfect (line 8)—an opinion with which he

readily concurs. But now there is a plague

and he must save the city. He admits that he

is as helpless as anybody, “no one is sicker

than I am” ( hōs egō ouk estin hymōn hostis ex isou nosei, 61-62), and that he must seek instruction which can only come from the holy oracles (68-77), for which reason he

has sent messengers to Delphi for orders and

is determined to do “whatever God reveals”

(77). To the king’s question, “What is the

word of the god?” the returning messenger’s

first word is esthlēn—wonderful! splendid!

It is good news indeed; he quickly adds that

there are hard conditions attached but

assures Oedipus that if the conditions are

met, “all will be well” (87-88). Is this

inexorable Fate? Having learned what is to

be done, Oedipus decides to act and leaves

the stage with the solemn declaration that

though he stand or fall, he will follow God

(144-46). The chorus then begs for divine

instruction— ambrote Phama—the child of golden hope (151-58). To the end there is

hope for Oedipus, if he will only admit his

mortal limitations and repent. Throughout the

play, whenever Oedipus asks for divine

instruction he gets it—and in his vanity

refuses to follow it. To the Sophic mind,

“Sophocles hints at no answer” 117 to Oedipus’s predicament; but to the Mantic

mind the answer stares him in the face from

first to last. In the play, Oedipus receives

nothing but good advice and good news: the former he rejects; the latter he willfully

misinterprets.

When the king returns to the stage it is

apparent that he is already slipping, for in a ringing speech he emphatically dissociates

himself from the crime and grandly

announces that others must face reality, no matter how grim (216-18). From here on he

keeps reverting subconsciously to the guilt

he will not acknowledge in himself in a

series of hypothetical situations: even if the guilty wretch should be related to his own

wife; even if he should be living at his own house—he will avenge Laius as if he were his own father. Incidentally, all that is

necessary to clear the city of the plague is

for the guilty party to leave it—no further

punishment is required.

The aged blind prophet Teiresias enters

and Oedipus goes on his knees to him: “Save

the city! Save me! . . . We are in your hands!”

(312-14). The prophet’s reply, referring both

to Oedipus’s renowned cleverness and to the

tooclever Athenians, goes right to the point:

“Being smart can only be disastrous to a man

who doesn’t know where his cleverness is

taking him! [Pheu, pheu, phronein hōs

deinon entha mē telē lyēi phronounti] (316-17). Then he asks Oedipus to let him go and

assures him, “It will be best if you bear your burden and I bear mine” (320-21)—more

good advice that Oedipus refuses to take, but

he insists on prophecy. The whole company

goes down on its knees to the prophet, who

pronounces Sophocles’ burning indictment

on the lot of them: “All of you know

nothing!” (328). When he refuses to

prophesy, explaining to Oedipus, “I don’t

want to hurt myself or you” (332), the king

like a spoiled child loses his temper and

calls him kakōn kakiste, the worst possible

name—the vilest of the vile (334), to which Teiresias replies by observing that the one

thing Oedipus cannot do is to admit a

weakness in himself—“in me you attack it

readily enough, but you simply can’t see it in yourself!” (337-38).

Then it is the blameless Oedipus who

shouts back at the holy man: “Who wouldn’t

lose his temper listening to such treason. I

don’t take that from anybody!” (339-40).

So then the priest finally comes out with

it: “You are the defilement of the land!”

(354).

“How can you dare say such a thing!”

cries the outraged king; and then, after a brief interchange, “How’s that again? Repeat it—I

want to know what you said” (359)—though

of course he understood perfectly well—he

doesn’t want to hear.

Teiresias: “You are the murderer you

seek!” (362).

Oedipus: “You won’t get away with that

a second time!” (363)—showing that he

heard him perfectly well the first time. “Say

as much as you like,” says Oedipus, “I won’t

listen to you” (365). Then, still the ill-

mannered child, he exploits a new angle—a

mean and shameless attack on the old man’s

blindness; and Teiresias in reply prophesies

Oedipus’s blindness—that is the theme of the

play, the blindness of which the Sophic and

the Mantic are always accusing each other.

Flinging all reserve aside, Oedipus shouts

the awful words: “It was not God, it was I

who solved the riddle of the Sphinx, by my

own unaided powers. I did it by using my

brains (gnōme kyrēsas oud’ ap’ oiōnōn

mathōn) and not by any supernatural hokum”

(398). This marks Oedipus as the official

representative of the Sophic position pure

and simple (exactly the way Anaxagoras

instructed Pericles) as Teiresias is of the Mantic, when he replies, “I am not your

servant but God’s. . . . You have usurped

divine authority; you are willfully blind—in

darkness at noon. After all,” he reminds the

king, “you begged for my instructions” (410-

15, 432).

“But I never would have,” replies the

other, “if I had known you were going to

utter foolishness” (434). Such is the good

faith of Oedipus, the helpless victim of the

relentless gods, and yet the critics insist that Oedipus is acting in good faith! The helpless

victim of an ancient curse! Teiresias’s

parting word to Oedipus is a fair enough

proposition: “Think it over, and if you ever

find that I was wrong you can call me a false

prophet” (460-62). The chorus then declares

that only God knows and men do not.

But does Oedipus ever play fair? He

proceeds to take the offensive as the best

defense against his own guilt feelings, completely transferring his guilt to his

brother-in-law Creon. Then Jocasta enters to

tell Oedipus that the prophecy about his

crime—that he would one day kill his father

—has been proven false, since the king has

just died far away in Corinth and, reasoning

like a typical Sophist, triumphantly argues

from that that all oracles are a fraud (707-9).

To drive home her point she gleefully recalls

that it was also predicted that her former

husband should be killed by his son, and

instead of that he was slain by a stranger at a place where three roads meet. This is of

course the worst thing she could have said,

but she thinks she is being terribly clever by debunking all prophecy. Even when Oedipus

complains of feeling dizzy and nauseated at

her words ( psychēs planēma k’anakinēsis

phrenōn, 726-27), she goes right on adding one clever demonstration after another,

thinking that she is burying the oracles as she digs the grave deeper and deeper. Oedipus

begins to admit that he has always suspected

things (785-86), and that he alone may be

morally responsible; still, how could he be

guilty when he was only obeying the oracle?

(821).

To this the chorus replies that Oedipus

is not condemned and that there is still hope of complete deliverance (834-35). Is this the

“victim without compensation or hope?” All

that is required by the oracle to clear the city of the plague is for the guilty party to leave town—no further punishment is mentioned.

And hope is not long in coming: another

messenger arrives with wonderful news—

Oedipus has been elected king of Corinth

(939-40), where his supposed father has just

died a natural death (934); it will be

remembered that there was a prophecy that

Oedipus would kill his father, and now that

monarch has died of old age. Heretofore, the one real disadvantage in his obeying the

oracle and delivering Thebes was that he

would in the process become an exile, but

now even that is taken care of; he has been

offered a splendid position, a promotion, in

his home town, and all he has to do is to

accept it and everyone will be happy. Instead

of that, he and Jocasta seize the occasion to

vent their savage spite on the oracles and

add a pious discourse on religious duty

(911-12). Jocasta, when she hears the news,

explodes with a Sophist shout of triumph: “O

oracles of the gods, where are you now!

(946). Now tell me what you think of your precious prophecies!” (952-53). This is the

more shocking, since the chorus, lamenting

the disastrous general neglect of holy things, has just vowed: “Though all others are deserting the holy shrines [another reference

to the Athenians], I will never desert!”

(865). Oedipus vents his pentup tensions and suppressed guilt feelings in a glorious,

savage, and needlessly ferocious

denunciation of all Mantic things:

“Halleluiah, wife! Who would ever take the

Pythian oracle or heavenly omens seriously

again?” (964-65). You see what they

prophesied, he says, and you see what

happened. He cannot in his relief resist a

merry witticism about the death of the old

king Polybus, “Perhaps I killed him, by

making him die of longing for me!”—in

which case the oracle would be right after

all—a delicious joke. Then an even more

vicious gibe: “Well, he’s taken all that

supernatural drivel (thespismata) down to hell with him—it’s as dead and stinking as

he is!” (969-72).

“That’s just what I’ve been trying to tell

you all along,” says his delighted wife (973), and delivers a thoroughly typical and

hackneyed Sophist speech such as Sophocles had heard a thousand times: “Why should we

worry about these things? After all, they just happen, and you can’t be sure about anything.

The best thing to do is just to try and get

along the best way you can, . . . and that

means paying no attention to dreams and

oracles and that sort of nonsense” (977-83).

To this commonsense sermon Oedipus

replies that they are still not in the clear,

since some prophecies still remain to be

disproven. Then, as the investigation

proceeds and the evidence begins to pile up,

it is Jocasta who begins to get panicky

—“Silly old stuff!” (1056); then shaken

—“That must be the explanation” (it was absurd and she knew it); frantic—“I beg you

—do not pursue this” (1060); then desperate

—“For your sake ask no more!” (1066).

Then Oedipus, also desperate, tries to

invent an issue that betrays his feelings of

insecurity: Jocasta is making all this fuss because she is ashamed of having married

one beneath her station—she and her fine

airs! (1070). She sees that her mate is

beyond hope and leaves him with the words,

“Oh you poor, miserable wretch! That’s all I

have to say—the whole thing is hopeless

now and everafter! That is all I can ever call you!” (1071-72). He has reached the point of

no return and still tries to tell himself that it is all her family pride.

“But I can’t lose!” he cries. “Lady Luck is my mother!” (1080). This is the well-known appeal to Tyche—Luck—which, as

they shed all vestiges of faith, was becoming

a veritable obsession with the Greeks: for

when faith moves out, superstition moves in

—everything is just chance, after all. Then

Merton, the aged herdsman of Laius who

knows the real secret of Oedipus’s birth and

upbringing, is dragged in and he too warns

the king not to go too far, to which good advice Oedipus responds characteristically

like a wild man by ordering the old man

tortured: “We will make you talk!” though he knows perfectly well what the answer will

be—“But still I must hear it!” (1170). This is Ate.

The irony is that from the beginning of

the play, everyone, including Providence,

has been trying to help Oedipus, who has been receiving nothing but good news and

good advice. The only disadvantage he has

to suffer is in becoming an expatriate from

Thebes, but now he has been offered a

splendid position, as king of Corinth—all he

has to do is leave town, with or without his

wife (and their marriage was only an affair

of state), and everything will be all right!

Here is no imponderable, inscrutable,

relentless working of an age-old family

curse, but a man able to receive salvation

any time he is willing to accept counsel. But right up to the end he insists on accusing

others of his own crimes, dashing through the

palace with drawn sword looking for

Jocasta— she is to blame for all this! (1250-60). And so, instead of leaving town in style, he goes forth as an outcast like Cain, having

marked himself with blindness, crying like Cain that his sufferings ( nosēma, affliction, disease) are greater than he can bear (1293-94). What mania brought this on him? the chorus asks (1299-1300), and further asks,

Why doesn’t he kill himself? Because he

knows that that would be no escape, for there

is indeed an afterlife (1369-71). Now he

knows the folly of trying to transfer his guilt

—“No mortal but myself can pay the price”

(1415)—Is he the god dying for the sins? the

Christ figure? No! He rejected all that as

outmoded. He has even blinded himself and

publicly confesses that the god, the oracular

Apollo he mocked, has smitten him with blindness, though he himself struck the blow;

he can blame no one, for he is self-blinded

as the Sophists are; and his words to the

chorus are, “Be not afraid, only believe!”

( pithesthe, mē deisēte! 1414). His crime was in destroying the foundations of faith,

and now he repents most terribly.

Creon announces that Oedipus is now a

true believer, “For now at last you believe in the god completely” (1445). Yet to the end

he must admonish the departing outcast, who

orders his daughters to go with him, to learn

submission, and Creon’s last words to

Oedipus are, “Do not think that you are still

giving all the orders” (panta mē boulou

kratein)! Creon is now inheriting not the curse but the arrogance of Oedipus, which is

to be his undoing! (1522). To the end,

Oedipus refuses to give in.

The closing chorus is a sermon for

Sophists: “Look fellow citizens, at Oedipus here, the man who knew all the answers and

was as able as any man could be. There

wasn’t another who did not look with envy

on his brilliant career—and look where he

ends up—in utter disaster. So let us

remember that no man can be called a

success until he has reached the terminal of

life without having suffered any misery at

all” (1524-30). In other words, the only

happiness lies beyond “the termination of

this life,” not here. Where is the moral

nullity in all this of which the critics

complain?

We know that the great men who like

Sophocles took the side of the Mantic in his

showdown were very much in the minority,

and that the Sophists, the self-appointed

successors of the Sophoi, won the game hands down—Longinus and Tacitus state the

case clearly enough. It was not the Sophoi

who raised a victorious banner in all the cities of the ancient world, but their diligent imitators the Sophists. Both, however, were

able to capitalize on the Mantic image. But,

having displaced the prophets, the Doctors

naturally aspired to their honors, supplanting not only the inspired men in the popular

esteem but God himself! If everything

happens “without any guiding mind,” which,

according to Plato, “everybody believes

today,” then the human mind must be the only

mind we can believe in—and who can doubt

among human minds which are the greatest?

The unabashed self-glorification and sublime

conceit of the schoolmen becomes one of the

main themes of ancient and medieval

literature. A favorite maxim of the Doctors

was that the knower is greater than the

known, and where they are the knowers and

all the rest of the universe is the known, or at least the object of their contemplation, where

does that leave us? As successors to the seers of old, the schoolmen willingly

received and encouraged the veneration once

accorded divinity; the critic henceforward is

himself the Great Sublime he draws. Plato

chooses as the representative type of the

most vicious and dangerous order of

Sophists the clever and charming Gorgias—

utterly cynical and opportunistic. And this

Gorgias merchandised his wares by

addressing the holy national assembly of all

the Greeks at Olympia clothed in priestly

robes, cleverly imitating the solemn and

ringing measures of oracular utterance in the

new rhetorical style of which he was one of

the inventors; his golden statue stood in the

Temple of Delphi, where during the holy

season he had “thundered his Pythian speech

from the altar. ”118

The Mantic pose was useful to the

Sophists, though it was but a meaningless

concession to tradition. Anaxagoras and his fellows might reinterpret the old myths in

terms of physics, and the Orphic theologians

reverse the process by transmitting the

mythical gods into the elements and forces of

the cosmos, but with them such Mantic

gestures were but literary affectations. Paul

Schmitt now argues that the Greek

philosophers, contrary to the prevailing

impression, did not have a disintegrating

effect on Greek religion—but what religion?

Schmitt’s only proof of his thesis is that

philosophy continued to show respect for the

outward forms. 119 I use the word Mantic in preference to “religion” precisely because

the Sophists, once in control, were perfectly

free to apply the label of religion to anything they chose. Many of the Sophists were, like

Toynbee, genuinely pious men, glowing with

a belief that “all creation has been groaning

and travailing to produce [them],” with a

deep and fervid feeling of their own holiness. 120 There is a Sophic religion: who was more devout and dedicated than Thomas

Henry Huxley, who more evangelical and

saintly in our own day than Professor

Simpson? John Dewey was devoted to the

project of freeing religion from all Mantic,

unscientific associations by founding his

own religion in which the works of Dewey

would have the status of holy scripture—a

process about as meaningful as the

production of silent music or odorless

perfume. Any apparent compromise of

Mantic and Sophic can only mean that the

one has absorbed the other. That is nowhere

more clearly seen than in the writings of the

Church Fathers.

The Christian Doctors of the fourth and

fifth centuries were all well-educated men,

thoroughly grounded in the prevailing

doctrines of the day. When they attack

paganism it is always the literal and supernatural, i.e., the Mantic, aspect of it that they assail—a perfectly safe procedure, the

mere beating of a dead horse, since nobody

took that stuff seriously any more anyway.

The same fathers, however, have only

reverence and respect for the Sophic

teachings of the schools, which the Church

swallowed hook, line, and sinker. Minucius

Felix speaks for all when he announces that

all educated Christians believe exactly what

all educated pagans do, while all educated

Greeks are just as contemptuous of their

outmoded traditions as all educated

Christians are of theirs—the “old wives’

tales” over which Jerome and Chrysostom

pour such contempt. There was a real knock-

down, drag-out fight between the

“Allegorists” and the “literalizers” in the

Church, ending with complete victory for the

intellectuals: henceforth any reviving spark

of crackpot sectarian Mantic is attacked by the churchmen with hysterical fury. That

group cannot be in the Catholic Church,

which claims to have prophets and

charismatic gifts, even though it follows all

the proper Christian forms. The Mantic has

become the very essence of heresy. The

Creeds of the fourth century and after were

Sophic, phrased in the jargon of the schools,

to the horror of many, if not most, good

Christians. There is nothing open-ended

about them, since their whole purpose is to

settle all problems once for all. The mood of the early Fathers is one of desperation rather than of faith; the fantastic cruelty and

intolerance of the fourth century are, Alföldi observes, a natural expression of the thinking of the times: “The victory of abstract ways

of thinking, the universal triumph of theory,

knows no half-measures; punishment, like

everything else, must be a hundred per cent,

but even this seemed inadequate.” 121 There was no place for the nonconforming Mantic

in this Sophic world of hundred-percenters.

St. Augustine completes the process of

de-Manticizing antique culture that began in

the sixth century B.C. It was he, we are told, who cast the Christian and antique cultures

together “once for all in one mighty mold,”

thereby achieving that fusion of once hostile

traditions which make up the metal of our

own civilization to this day. But what the

great man put into the crucible was not the

whole of the Christian or the Greek heritage,

but only the Sophic part of each; that is why

he was able to fuse them. Much has been

written about Augustine as the man who

finally closed the books on chiliastic

charismatic Christianity, but what is not so

well known is that at the same time he

finished off the lingering traces of Mantic

glory in the antique tradition. His famous

justification for including the learning of non-Christian antiquity in the curriculum of

the Christian schools was the doctrine of

“spoiling the Egyptians.” The Egyptians have

good stuff which we can use without danger

if we make a careful selection: “I have

nothing against their words,” he writes,

“which are rare and precious vessels; only

the wine of error they contain displeases

me.” The figure is an apt one: what the fourth century valued in the ancients was not the

content of their work, but simply the

cellophane package of rhetoric, the

ornamental vases which the schools could

use only after they were empty.

The thousands of quotations that ballast

the writings of Augustine, which were to

furnish the whole Middle Ages with their

classical diet, have enabled specialists to

reconstruct with ease and confidence what

St. Augustine regarded as “the treasures of

the Egyptians.” They show that he did not trust the ancients in their moments of

inspiration: Homer he hated; the lyric poets

he ignored; though he spent a good part of his life in the theater, the only dramatist who

engages his fancy is the shallow and

conventional Terrence; when he read history

it was not the pages of Thucydides or Tacitus

but the dull, dignified school texts and

manuals of a Justin, a Pompeius, a Philippus,

or a Eutropius; most significant of all, though a practicing orator and professor of the art,

he gives no sign of having read Demosthenes

or any of the Ten, or any orator at all, in fact, but Cicero, whom he prizes especially for

his highly unoriginal philosophy. The only

writers of real gifts that appeal to him, Vergil and Aesop, are those which he was taught to

affect as a small boy in school. In a word, he preferred erudition to inspiration. Please

notice that he had no objection to pagan

writers as such, but only to the inspired pagan writers, whom he condemns with

unerring instinct.

It may seem strange that it took

Christianity to drive the last lingering traces of the Mantic court out of the world—it was

Theodosius who closed the last shrines of

the Muses. That is because the Christian

Fathers had a more clear-cut view and lively

dread of the Mantic from their long feud with

the old-fashioned Christians. The pagan

Doctors actually took some timid steps to

revive the Mantic in order to compete with

that early Mantic Christianity. But the

Christian Doctors had to compete with it too,

since it was wholly incompatible with their

program of taking Christianity to school. And

they attacked it with uncompromising

tenacity, even though they recognized that it

was indeed the old original Christian

tradition.

III. The Sophistic Junkyard There are many indications in the world

today of a general drift in the direction of

what we have been calling the Mantic. We

cannot do more than indicate a few of them

here—ten of the more striking phenomena

that have emerged since World War II and

seem to have been gaining in power ever

since.

1. The rediscovery of the eschatological

nature of the New Testament and the

Christian church comes as a great surprise,

not because eschatological elements had

been hidden away, but because they have

always been so glaringly apparent on almost

every page of the Bible. The astounding fact

that Christian eschatology actually had to be

rediscovered by Catholic and Protestant

alike in our own day is an indication of how

completely Sophic the thinking of the

Christians has been all these years. The new

trend can be illustrated by the use of the word kerygma, referring to the literal-eschatological preaching of the primitive

Christians as against the later moral-

philosophical emphasis. After a search

through the literature, the editors of the

Expository Times report that the word “thirty years ago . . . hardly existed,” while today

“index references to it may well outnumber

those of any other single word. ”122

2. But another theme now bids fair to

overshadow even eschatology in the

journals, a theme closely related to it but

considered taboo until quite recently. This is the subject of revelation and inspiration.

“The return to ideas of inspiration and

revelation may be put down as one of the

marked trends of our biblical scholarship of

the last decade,” wrote S. Vernon

McCasland in 1954.123 It is, moreover, not the safe conventional concept of revelation

that the experts are now toying with so dangerously, but something, as one of them

says, very different from the traditional

formulations. It is in fact Mantic instead of

Sophic, a deliberate renunciation of the

traditional doctrine and a departure from

what the Church has from the first believed

concerning special revelation.

3. There is a growing partiality to

literalism today, since the discovery of a real Age of the Patriarchs to take the place of the mythical one, and a real primitive Christian

society to supplant a vague and hypothetical

one. Former liberals now break down and

confess that to read anything but a literal

meaning into Christ’s words when he

obviously meant them to be literal is “to

contort his message . . . to suit our

preconceptions”; and many a scholar is now

asking how we can continue to call

ourselves Christians unless we are willing to

believe the things which we now know the original Christians believed. A surprising

example of the new literalism is the plea

now being made for an anthropomorphic

God—a word of opprobrium not long ago.

Are “the terms most commonly applied to

God . . . logically compatible with the

biblical God?” Professor Cherbonnier asks,

and replies with a ringing negative; the God

of the philosophers is not the God of the Bible and never was. 124 The one is Sophic, the other, Mantic. The actual return of the

Jews to the Promised Land has given a new

sense of reality to ancient prophecy, and

many churchmen are now willing to concede

a literal fulfillment of prophecy which all the Doctors of the Church—not the least among

them Luther and Calvin—rejected with

horror.

4. Christian churches everywhere have

begun to betray a marked hankering for the

old charismatic gifts. Protestants and Catholics alike would now have us believe

that the old prophetic tradition was never

completely lost. But Professor Tillich knows

better: “This discourse,” he writes at the

introduction of a recent study, “is based on

the proposition that the prophetic tradition of the Church was lost. It is one of the great

tragedies in the History of the Christian

Church, that this tradition actually and

virtually completely perished. . . . For St.

Augustine the Millennium is here, everything

essential has been achieved . . . in the

hierarchy of the Church. With this theory the

spirit of Prophecy was expelled from the

official Church.” 125 We have already noted that with St. Augustine, the most eminent of

the Doctors, the Sophic completely supplants

the Mantic in Christian theology; it is

reassuring to have Dr. Tillich say the same

thing, and especially to hear his declaration

that what happened was a major catastrophe.

Other gifts of the Spirit are also being

invited back into the churches today, and one

sober Episcopalian scholar glories that of

recent years glossolalia has appeared in the

Episcopal Church, of all bodies.

5. The new respect with which the

ancient Mysteries are being studied and the

laborious attempts to reconcile those

resemblances between them and the

mysteries of the Catholic Church which

cannot be explained away is a step in the

direction of the Mantic. For while authors

like Jung and Rahner remain stoutly Sophic

and scientific, they are constantly crowding

the rational over the line—just a little bit—

into superrational territory while gently

prodding the abstract and spiritual ever more

in the direction of the literal. It is a head-

swimming performance in double-talk. It has

been increasingly recognized in recent years

that the ritual and liturgy of the Church was actually a substitute for the lost charismatic gifts; the mass thus presents the ultimate

paradox, a controlled miracle, in which the

priest does everything but actually does

nothing. It is in precisely this “basic

contradiction” that Catholic scholars find the wonder and mystery of the whole thing, the

mystery being simply that it cannot be

explained. Here at least is a momentary

relaxation of vaunted Sophic rigor—“steeled

in the school of old Aquinas,” who for all

that leaned so heavily on his precious

Areopagite to avoid the literalism of the

Bible.

6. With recent important manuscript

discoveries has come a new respect for the

old apocryphal writings. Not many years

ago, leading Catholic and Protestant

authorities on apocrypha and apocalyptic

could not find words to express their

contempt for the lurid, undisciplined, stereotyped, and childishly literal thinking

that characterized this large and important

segment of Christian tradition. Today its

rising prestige is another sign of weakening

Sophic controls. Along with this has come

the rediscovery of Israel by both Catholics

and Protestants, who now want to call

themselves Israel, help rebuild Jerusalem,

and convince us that they have never really

broken with the prophetic heritage.

7. We have already mentioned the

bridges that scholarship is now building

between all sorts of ancient, medieval, and

modern religious societies and their

traditions, but we should not overlook the

discovery of the heretofore unsuspected

significance or even existence of what

Professor Goodenough calls “Vertical”

Judaism. 126 It seems that the traditional Rabbinic, Halakhic Judaism which we have

always thought to be the one and only official religion of the Jews achieved its

Alleinherrschaft only after suppressing with great difficulty an older and diametrically

opposed tradition of “mystic,” Hasidic, or

inspired Judaism. It is the old story of

Sophic vs. Mantic all over again, with the

Jewish Sophic teachings coming straight

from the Greek school of Alexandria,

whence the Christians and later the Moslems

also took their Sophic life. After all, the

spirit of the Sophic is as all-pervading, as

uniform in content, and as centralized in

origin as the Mantic. But the belated

recognition of the rights and claims of

Vertical as over against Horizontal Judaism

is a definite step in the direction of the

Mantic.

8. Perhaps the most significant bridge to

be flung out in our times is that which seeks

life on other worlds. True, the other worlds

are still just a possibility, but such a vivid one that their religious impact is already

being felt. A recent symposium of American

scientists on the subject of “Life in Other

Worlds” turned into a general attack on any

tendency or desire to engage in religious or

otherwordly speculations on the subject. 127

Was this onslaught on religion uncalled for

or irrelevant? Not at all. The reality of other worlds is the fundamental thesis of the

Mantic. What other reason can there be that

the scientists so long, so dogmatically, and

with no evidence whatever asserted that

there just could not be life on other worlds, and why today they almost panic to forestall

any Mantic interpretation now that they

concede its validity?

9. Another singular development of our

times is the attempt by hitherto impeccably

indoctrinated Sophic thinkers to break out of

their Sophic box by the use of drugs. The

consensus of these scholars, poets, and scientists is that the Sophic world is a pretty drab place, in spite of all the vaunted

enticements of science, art, and scholarship.

“Art is an Ersatz,” is the verdict of one of

these eminent experimenters, “the elegantly

composed recipe in lieu of actual dinner.”

The general public unconsciously sustains

this verdict in its mass dependence on

tobacco and alcohol. The effects of certain

drugs were also achieved by mystics and

ascetics everywhere by various fasts and

exercises. Though the experiences induced

by mescalin and mushroom are recognized as

real and not as imaginary, still they are

strangely unsatisfactory. “The natural poetic

trance,” as Robert Graves puts it, “means a

good deal more to me than any trance

induced by artificial means.” 128 That is because, as we have already indicated, an

experience is not genuinely Mantic which is

in any way self-induced or controlled.

10. Another Mantic development of our

time is the phenomenal growth of the

Mormon Church, a growth quietly

proceeding with only scarce and reluctant

publicity. Some years ago I made a long

study of just what objections had been raised

against Mormonism in the past. From the

beginning it was always the same. Nobody

was really worried about polygamy, which

was in fact a welcome stick to beat the

Mormons with; the ferocious denunciations

from press and pulpit, the incitement of

mobs, and the stampeding of legislatures

always rested on one thing alone—the

incredible fact that in an age of modern

enlightenment, universal education, and

scientific supremacy there should be found

coexisting with Christian civilization a

community of primitives so ignorant, so

deluded and depraved as to believe in

revelations from heaven and the operation of charismatic gifts. In the Journal of

Discourses, Mormon leaders steadily hurled charges of gross darkness, total unbelief, and pious double-talk against the Christian

clergy who insisted that Christians simply

could not fellowship beings so degenerate as

to believe in modern-day prophets and

angelic visitations. It was the purest case of Mantic versus Sophic. Yet today it is the

same church journals that publish anti-

Mormon denunciations that ring with fervid

calls for a return to eschatology and

inspiration.

The trend towards the Mantic is so

broad and strong as to suggest a reversal of

the Sophic tide of 600 B.C. The Mantic was

exhausted then; today it is the Sophic that is leading us nowhere. The old evangelistic

fervor of the Evolutionists with its gospel of eternal organic progression is viewed with a

jaundiced eye today, when leading evolutionists insist that evolution is a diffuse sort of network process that is going

nowhere—it has no consistent direction. It is

significant that H. G. Wells, the prophet of

the glorious future that science was going to

give us, turns out to be most interesting when he is writing about the past; his wonderful world of the future is a crashing bore: glass

corridors under the sea may provide some

hours of fun, but the exhilaration of

exchanging stares with silent fishes can

deteriorate after a while into something like

a nightmare.

The Greeks too had their science

fiction. Friedrich Blass reports that when he

first read Lucian as a youth he was

convinced, as were the men of the

Renaissance, that he was in the presence of a

truly great creative genius, only to discover

later that Lucian, the clever debunker and

science-fiction writer, could not stand rereading because he had no soul. Science

fiction, with its “suggestion of infinite

possibilities” and its spying on other worlds, was an ancient, as it is a modern, substitute

for eschatology. 129

Here let us correct a common

misunderstanding, namely that magic belongs

to the Mantic tradition. It does not: it is the purest Sophic. The essence of magic power

is that it resides in physical objects—wands,

books, rings, robes, magic words, potions,

seals, amulets, charms, etc.—independent of

any higher power or moral order. Solomon’s

seal, Aaron’s rod, or the Philosopher’s Stone

will operate for anybody—they are self-

operating and self-contained, like the self-

operating cosmos of the naturalist. “The eye

makes itself,” we are told; we need look no

further than the atoms and molecules that

make it up for a full explanation of all that

transpires. This, according to Professor Simpson, is the very essence of scientific

thinking. It is also the purest magical

thinking, looking no further than the thing

itself, or a connected but always limited

chain of things, to explain everything—

beyond the wand or the microscope or the

test-tube there is nothing.

But even a Sophic society needs, as

Professor Wallace O. Fenn reminds us, a

sense of something to live for, and this is

provided in various ways. Dr. Fenn himself

suggests the cult of scientific research,

particularly biology, as the answer, as

Anaxagoras did long ago (“From a very long

range point of view biological research

becomes the highest objective that can be

thought of for human life. . . . Unlike the

physical sciences biology can be almost a

religion in itself”)—but he himself is a

researcher and admittedly frustrated, since

biology is apparently no nearer to discovering the meaning of life than it ever

was (“This problem of consciousness is one

which biology has never cracked”).130 It was the Sophists themselves who supplied the

standard solution to the problem of keeping

hope and expectation alive in the human

breast by developing the cult of careerism to

a religion. Mere rank brings small

satisfaction to intelligent people, and ninety-nine percent of the work done by those who

are climbing the military, civil, or corporate gradus honorum does not really need to be done; what keeps the elaborate, artificial,

and costly promotion structures alive is the

invaluable sense of expectation they infuse

into a society. As civilizations decline they

become progressively enveloped in a system

of creeping careerism in which eventually

every calling is a career and everyone lives

for promotion.

As a stimulant to living, the cult of travel has always figured conspicuously in

Sophic societies. The peculiar calling of the

Seven Sages required them to be always

moving about among the children of men as

the seven planets move through the Zodiac.

But long before their day, the roads

connecting the holy shrines and schools of

the East were worn by the feet of priests,

bards, teachers, and scholars constantly

traveling in their quest for wisdom and

sanctity. At the great centers they would

come to know each other and be known; life

was a pilgrimage to holy places in which

one acquired ever-increasing knowledge,

merit, and renown. The Sophists continued

the program, with increased emphasis on the

fame-and-fortune motif, and it was carried

on throughout the Middle Ages by the

Moslem Doctors. The extensive

Reiseberichte and Gelehrtenregister of the

Greeks and Arabs show how completely dependent the Sophic world is on travel to

keep alive the spirit of expectation. It is the airport culture of our own day.

Then there is Art as an Ersatz for the

Mantic—the menu instead of the dinner, as

Huxley put it. Great artists are Mantic souls, but to be an artist without being a great artist is being a king without being a great king—

an intolerable, not to say absurd, situation:

aut Caesar aut nihil: The mediocre artist has an axe to grind with the niggardly Muses

and invariably takes refuge in the Sophic,

becoming the most intellectual of

intellectuals. A little inquiry will show that the most determined and implacable enemies

of the Mantic are to be found not among the

scientists and scholars but among the artists

—particularly the painters. It may be said

that hatred of the Mantic is a pretty good

measure of frustration in any department.

The aesthetic appeal of religious ritual is highly recommended by many thinkers

seeking to salvage the undeniable human

need for religion from the wreck of

outmoded supernaturalism. This, however, is

a purely Sophic performance. The Mantic is

not at the disposal of Hollywood; it is not photogenic and will not be manipulated. The old Christian indifference to great works of

religious art, gorgeous antique liturgy,

gracefully gesturing priests, and lovely old

legends comes under attack in the Octavius of Minucius Felix by a Roman gentleman

who equally deplores Christian

preoccupation with the other world in

preference to this one and their whole anti-

intellectual attitude. There is nothing in the Mantic that could be used by a popular

picture magazine. The most glorious special

effects do not have even a hint of heaven.

Recently Martin Grabmann’s

Geschichte der scholastischen Methode has been reprinted.131 The whole work is devoted to an attempt to prove that in

embracing the philosophy of the Schools, the

Church was not betraying its original

tradition. Grabmann works valiantly to

anticipate and answer certain annoying

questions that the adoption of Scholasticism

by the Church inevitably raises. To the

natural question of why the Church borrowed

Scholastic philosophy in the first place, the

conventional answer is that it did nothing of

the sort, but spontaneously and independently

invented the art with no deference whatever

to the pagans. But Grabmann is too well-

informed to go along with that and prefers

the argument that philosophy, even false

pagan philosophy, can help us to a fuller

understanding of the content of revealed

knowledge by furnishing a strong and

reliable apodexis (demonstration), of the

things that have been left us through faith.

“Its purpose,” says Grabmann “is to give us

Vollbesitz der christlichen Wahrheit” (full understanding of Christian truth). But is not

revelation itself the last word in apodexis, and were not the Prophets and Apostles in

full possession of the truth? Yes, is the reply, but we do not understand them fully, because

the revelation they received directly was by

nature übervernünftig—suprarational; so we must needs have some rational discipline to

explain it. But can we explain the

nonrational in terms of the rational? If so,

why was not the “Christian truth” delivered

in rational form in the first place? Why must

it be reworked by the Scholastic discipline

in order to become intelligible?

Answer: Reworking is hardly the word;

Grabmann insists at all times that

Scholasticism “bedeutet keine inhaltliche

Umprägung und Entstellung des

Urchristentums” (implies no substantial transformation and distortion of primitive

Christianity). To prove this he searched out

declarations of Justin, Clement, and others

that their teachings were not corrupting the Christian faith. Of course they affirm that;

what else could they do? But the fact is that

they all worry a good deal about what they

are doing, while the mere assertion that one

is perfectly orthodox in spite of everything

carries little enough weight coming from the

very men who loudly protest against the use

of the Rhetorical handmaiden of

Scholasticism, while every page of their

work bears the stamp of Rhetoric. Why not

dispense with Rhetoric and Scholastic

altogether? Because, says Grabmann of the

latter, without it revelation is both

incomprehensible and unbelievable. Then

the Scholastic method can do what

revelation cannot do, namely convey a clear

and unequivocal message to men? Not at all!

“By its very nature,” says Grabmann,

“revelation assumes that it can be understood

by men, nay, it is the supreme act of

understanding.” 132 Then we must ask again, why must the intellectual machinery of the

schools be brought to the aid of that

supernatural power? Well, the whole

operation of Scholastic can be summed up in

the immortal formula fides quaerens

intellectum. Does that mean that faith must still seek something after the perfect and final revelation of the truth? If it is still

looking for something, it must be defective.

Answer: It is not seeking doctrine or

information but simply clearer and sharper

expression and definition of what it believes.

And for that it must turn to the ailing

schools of antiquity? Let us remember that

the schools had reached an all-time

intellectual low at the time the church chose

to embrace their methods. The church married a “sick man,” says Duchesne, when

she joined forces with the state under

Theodosius; 133 she married a much sicker one when she embraced the schools of the

same decadent age. What could the church

gain by such a match? It is inconceivable that the wedding could have taken place had

either of the parties retained its original

vigor and independence—but both, as the

writings of the Fathers make painfully clear,

were in a desperate condition. One of the

earliest fragments of church history is

Hegesippus’s remark: “up until then the Church had remained a pure and incorrupted

virgin.” 134 Up until when? Until the philosophers took over. The last Roman, for

Grabmann, was also the first Scholastic,

who “minted the authentic coin of its Latin

terminology”—that noble Boethius, who in

his last hours was comforted not by religion

but by an allegorical visit from Dame Philosophy.

Now again, why was the marriage with

philosophy necessary? Answer: “To

overcome the objections of reason to

revelation”—that is St. Augustine’s famous

reconciliation of Classical and Christian

learning. But how can you call it

reconciliation when it is always the church

that gives way? It is always reason that has

to be satisfied and revelation that must be

manipulated in order to give that satisfaction; this is no compromise but complete

surrender, by which Theology “becomes the

train-bearer of the Old Queen Philosophy.”

Augustine’s long and painful “conversion,”

as he describes it, was the progressive

realization that Christian doctrine could be

accommodated to the teachings of the

schools by the application of Tichonius’s

Seven Rules of Tropology—but the tropes

are never applied to “the works of the Platonists,” which remain the undeviating

norm, but always to the conveniently

adjustable Scriptures. The key word is

accommodation, and Schweitzer and others

have seen in the history of Christian dogma

one long process of de-eschatologizing. “The

result of the continued repetition of this

undignified retreat, during many

generations,” writes Alfred N. Whitehead of

the last phase of it, “has at last almost

entirely destroyed the intellectual authority

of religious thinkers. ”135 Well, if they insist on their authority being intellectual, what

other choice have they but to accommodate

with the best intellectual discipline of the

times?

The result of the marriage was that each

party contracted the other’s disease: both

were seriously weakened by the match, as

Eucken observes. Many have described how

Christianity acquired the worst vices of the schools—shallow rhetoric, learned

obscurity, academic formalism, hair-splitting

subtlety, and above all a total inability to

create or discover. Grabmann repeatedly

comments on how the greatest Christian

thinkers for generation after generation can

do nothing but copy and compile. It was

Jerome who lamented that the ancients had

left him nothing to say—even as a Christian.

In Scholasticism, the Western mind,

according to Norden, reaches its bathos, and

even Grabmann admits that by the eleventh

century Christian philosophy had

degenerated into “eitle Sophistik.” 136

Yet it had to be that or nothing. Without

“science and intellect,” Thomas Aquinas

assures us, the student of Christianity would

have nothing to study: nihil acquiret sed

vacuus abscedet—he would acquire nothing, but go away empty. How bankrupt the

Doctors must have been to accept with open arms the once despised contribution of the

schools! Nay, they gloried in it, satisfied that in it they had the full equivalent of

revelation; like the smart-alec youth of

Pericles’ Athens, they had a “joyous

confidence in the omnipotence of logical

demonstration,” says Reinhold Seeberg.

“There was an ever-widening circle of

disputants who either depended solely upon

rational arguments or held that faith should at least find confirmation in the deductions of

reason.” 137 Even today the philosophia perennis of the Catholic Church is “complete trust in the power of reason, the absolute

validity of the law of causality.” The deadly

sin of Modernism, Grabmann announces, is

simply “the rejection of Intellectualism,” and the transfer of religion “to a realm of

feeling.” “The Roman Catholic Church has

made reason its bulwark,” he cries, “against

the intellectual high crimes of the times: Lack of order and system in thinking

( Unordnung und Regellosigkeit im

Denken), subjectivism, and the increase of fantasy at the expense of logic—. . . shallow, imprecise ( verschommenes), confused, and oracular expression.” All of these are

treason against the “clarity, precision,

sharpness, logical consequence, and

systematic structure” of Scholasticism. It is

only fair to recall, however, that St.

Augustine took the Sophic way only after

long and unavailing efforts to acquire an

experience of direct revelation: for him

logical consequence was a poor second best,

and he finally accepted it with a heavy heart

only because he had no choice.

Much of the literature and art of our day

is simply a bitter commentary on the

emptiness of the world. We can gain nothing

by joining the angry chorus, but we can get a

new insight into emptiness if we will stand on a cold windy mesa in Tusayan just at

dawn on a spring morning. All around is

nothing but a vast expanse of sterile sand,

stretching to barren bluffs and volcanic

peaks on the dark horizon; except for the

dim, huddled houses of an ancient stone

village, there is only bare rock, the vast

ceaseless wind, and the fading stars. We are

in an empty, inhospitable, primordial world,

suspended between earth and sky on a high

cold rock, and there, in the midst of this

gloom and nothingness, there is a play going

on! A drama is being enacted with great

concentration and talent—and likely as not at

this hour without a single spectator. We think of other dramas in the desert—Qumran or the

Siwa Oasis—and realize that this Hopi

dance in the vast emptiness of the

Southwestern Desert is our little world in the vaster emptiness of space, where in the

infinite void on a bright tiny stage, all, all alone, a play is being performed.

Shakespeare is haunted by the image of

the drama in the void: “the cloud-capped

towers, the gorgeous palaces, the solemn

temples, the great globe itself, yea, all that it inherits, shall dissolve, and like this

insubstantial pageant faded, leave not a rack

behind.” 138 It is the void that appalls him, as it does other poets living in Sophically

oriented societies:

One moment in annihilation’s

waste,

One moment of the wine of life

to taste—

The stars are setting, and the

caravan

Starts for the dawn of nothing

—O, make haste!139

“Welch’ Schauspiel!” cries Goethe,

“Aber ach, ein Schauspiel nur!” 140 Only a play? Actually the awful emptiness only

makes the drama the more marvelous. The

presence of nothing and the vast inane—that

we can readily understand; but that there

should be anything else besides, to say nothing of a full-blown drama, is simply

incredible. If that little play can come out of nothing, as the Sophic mind assures us it

does, then our troubles are over: if nothing

can produce that, then there is no end to what nothing can produce. Once we have broken

through the barrier of existence, as the

Egyptians taught, the rest is easy; once the

incredible obstacles of coming to be have

been surmounted, that of continuing existence

becomes a mere technicality.

But what about the drama? If you miss

the first or last five minutes of a well-knit

play, you may try to guess what it is all

about, but you can never be sure; and if you should see only thirty seconds or less of any

play, your guessing would be far-fetched

indeed. Well, we are pushed onto this earthly

stage in the middle of a play that has been

going on for thousands of years; we want to

play an intelligent part and, in whispers, ask some of the older actors what this is all

about—what we are supposed to be doing?

And we soon learn that they know as little

about it as we do. Who can tell us the plot of the play? The Sophic mind assures us that the

play is simply a product of lighting, rocks,

and wind and has no plot aside from the

plots we invent for it. In that book things just happen—and there is no way of proving that

that is not so. The mystic makes a virtue of

the incomprehensibility of the whole thing;

he submerges himself in the darkness of

unknowing and wallows in his self-induced

and self-dramatizing mood of contradictions:

he is strictly a Sophic, not a Mantic, product.

The Mantic admits that the play is

incomprehensible to people of as little

knowledge and experience as ours, and

insists for that reason that if we are to know anything at all about it, our knowledge must

come from a higher source, by revelation.

According to the Mantic way of thinking,

things do not just happen—and there is absolutely no way of proving that that is not so. The same starry heavens that have

supplied the Mantic with irrefutable proof

since time immemorial that things do not just

happen has always been the most self-

evident proof in the world to the Sophic that

things do just happen.

That drama on the windy rock at the end

of the world naturally puts us in mind of

Prometheus Bound, a drama that definitely takes us back to the Mantic. The interesting

thing about the setting here is the way in

which Aeschylus teaches us that the drama in the void is not in the void at all and that the hero’s supposedly hopeless case is by no

means hopeless. Zeus and his Sophistic

counsellors (the messenger Hermes in this

play is the model Sophist) have tried to

consign Prometheus to utter isolation and

hopelessness; they have banished him to the

most distant and inhospitable region of the

universe and there chained him in the most

paralyzing and at the same time excruciating

manner possible. Plainly it is all up with

Prometheus. And yet the plan fails: the

whole play consists of a string of visitors

and messengers to Prometheus from other

worlds, and reminders of other worlds and

other orders that were before this one, and

yet others that will surely come after.

Prometheus’s isolation is only temporary, the

determined effort of the Sophists to nullify

his whole existence is a complete failure.

Like Job, Prometheus takes his comfort not in the desperate present but in the assured

past.

Eusebius develops the theory that all

that is good and desirable in any civilization is actually a survival from some previous

age of enlightenment when the Gospel was

on the earth and men received light from

heaven. Since civilization and the arts are of course older than Christianity, he does not

presume that God’s gifts to mankind began

with Jesus, but conceives of earlier

dispensations when the earth was blessed

with divine visitations and showered with

heavenly gifts, only to be followed in the

course of human affairs by inevitable

corruption and apostasy. Dispensationism is

a conspicuous item in the Jewish and

Christian Apocrypha, in the early Christian

writings, and now in the Dead Sea Scrolls. A

dispensation is not a reformation but a

restoration, specifically, a return of revelation—“again the heavens were open.”

Whenever revelation is resumed, the holy

order of things revives, while that holy order cannot survive after revelation has ceased,

no matter how hard men try to preserve and

imitate its institutions. The sacral order is

thus completely dependent on revelation.

But that is not all. The uninspired,

secular order of things, which we have

called Sophic, is also, as Eusebius notes, a

derivative of the old Mantic society, living

on the capital of an earlier prosperity. The

primary function of the Christian Church, the

Doctors tell us, is to preserve unchanged and

undiminished the deposit of past revelation,

carefully guarding the cisterns which hold

the precious water which has long since

ceased to flow, as “living water” must flow,

from the source. Thus it would appear that

the substance of a civilization would be very

much the same whether the civilization is

“Sophic” or “Mantic”—it is the world view

of each that puts them poles apart. All this is important when it comes to understanding the

peculiar role of Mormonism in the world.

Notes

“Three Shrines: Mantic, Sophic, and

Sophistic” were a series of lectures

delivered at the Sterling Library Lecture

Hall at Yale University, New Haven,

Connecticut, under the sponsorship of the

Latter-day Saint Deseret Club at Yale on

May 1, 2, and 3, 1963.

Footnotes

^1. Carl Kerenyi, The Gods of the Greeks (New York: Grove, 1960), 4-8.

^2. Synesius Ptolemais, De Insomniis 147, in PG

66:1305.

^3. This is brought out, for example, in Aristides, Apology 13, in J. Rendel Harris, The Apology of Aristides on Behalf of the

Christians (Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1893), 108-9.

^4. Eric V. Gordon, An Introduction to Old Norse (Oxford: Clarendon, 1927), xxxi.

^5. Plato, Apology 19C, 20C.

^6. Ibid., 21E-23D.

^7. Eduard Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, 3

vols., 5th ed. (Berlin: Cotta, 1926), 1:2:211-

12.

^8. I. E. S. Edwards, The Pyramids of Egypt (New York: Penguin Books, 1964), 29-30.

^9. Louis Speelers, Textes des cercueils du Moyen Empire égyptien (Bruxelles: Dept, 1947), x.

^10. Westcar Papyrus 7, 6-7, in Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd ed. (Oxford:

Griffith Institute, 1957), 228.

^11. Alfred N. Whitehead, quoted in Lucien Price, “To Live without Certitude,” Atlantic Monthly 193 (March 1954): 59.

^12. Josephus, Against Apion I, 236.

^13. Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica I, 9, in PG 21:65.

^14. Aristotle, Oeconomica II, 2, 33.

^15. Dio Chrysostom, Discourse XII, 15.

^16. Erwin R. Goodenough, Jewish Symbols in the Greco-Roman Period, 13 vols. (New York: Pantheon Books, 1953), 1:18-21.

^17. Synesius Ptolemais, De Insomniis, in PG

66:1305.

^18. Goodenough, Jewish Symbols, 1:17-18, 20-21.

^19. Empedocles, in Sextus Empericus, Against the Logicians I, 122.

^20. Charles H. Kahn, “Religion and Natural Philosophy in Empedocles’ Doctrine of the

Soul,” Archiv für Geschichte und

Philosophie 42 (1960): 3.

^21. O. D. Chwolsohn (Khvol’son), Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus, 2 vols. (St. Petersburg: Buchdruckerei der Kaiserlichen Akademie

der Wissenschaften, 1856), 2:15.

^22. Morton S. Enslin, “A Gentleman among the

Fathers,” Harvard Theological Review 47

(1954): 238-39.

^23. Ibid., 230.

^24. Kostas Papaioannou, “Nature and History in the Greek Conception of the Cosmos,”

Diogenes 25 (1959): 14.

^25. Commenting on Sophocles’ Eleusinian fragment, in F. J. H. Letters, The life and Work of Sophocles (New York: Sheed and Ward, 1953), 63-66.

^26. H. H. Rowley, “Ritual and the Hebrew Prophets,” in S. H. Hooke, ed., Myth,

Ritual, and Kingship (London: Oxford

University Press, 1958), 246-47, 258.

^27. Letters, The Life and Work of Sophocles, 64.

^28. C. G. Jung, “Transformation Symbolism in the Mass,” in Joseph Campbell, ed., The

Mysteries: Papers from the Eranos

Yearbooks (New York: Pantheon Books,

1955), 318-19. In the same volume, Hugo

Rahner’s article, “The Christian Mystery

and the Pagan Mysteries,” observes that “it

is of the utmost importance for the

understanding of this mystery of the Cross that we recall the fundamental structure of

all mysteries,” 371; and Hans Leisegang’s

article, “The Mystery of the Serpent,” notes

that “the Christian cosmos can be shown to

be directly related, both formally and

conceptually, to the Orphic cosmos,” 228;

while Paul Schmitt observes in his article,

“The Ancient Mysteries in the Society of

Their Time: Their Transformation and Most

Recent Echoes,” that Homer’s Hymn to

Demeter is an “almost medieval hymn,”

106.

^29. Jung, “Transformation Symbolism in the Mass,” 319.

^30. Ernst Benz, “Christus und Sokrates in der alten Kirche,” Zeitschrift für die

neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 43 (1950): 195-97; and Erich Fascher, “Sokrates und

Christus,” Zeitschrift für die

neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 45 (1954): 1-41.

^31. Cf., for example, Clement, Epistola I ad Corinthios (First Epistle to the

Corinthians) VI, 25, in PG 1:220-21, 261-66. “Solon eidem regi finem longae vitae

intuendum praedicavit non aliter, quam

prophetae [Solon told the same king that the

end of a long life must be seen much as the

prophets did],” says Tertullian, Apologeticus adversus Gentes XIX, 1, in PL 1:440.

^32. Hugh Nibley, “The Hierocentric State,”

Western Political Quarterly 4 (1951): 230-35, 250-51; reprinted in this volume, pages

103-10, 130-31.

^33. Ibid., 226-30; reprinted in this volume, pages 99-103.

^34. Pindar, frg. 137: “Blessed is he who hath seen these things before he goeth beneath

the hollow earth; for he understandeth the

end of mortal life, and the beginning (of a

new life) given of god”; John Sandys, tr.,

The Odes of Pindar including the Principal Fragments (Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press, 1968), 593-95.

^35. Walter Wili, “The Orphic Mysteries and the Greek Spirit,” in Campbell, The Mysteries, 77.

^36. Walter F. Otto, “The Meaning of the Eleusinian Mysteries,” in Campbell, The

mysteries, 14.

^37. Wili, “Orphic Mysteries,” 87.

^38. Theodor Gomperz, Griechische Denker: Eine Geschichte der antiken Philosophie, 3

vols. (Leipzig: Veit, 1903), 1:65.

^39. Otto, “Eleusinian Mysteries,” 25, comments on “the veneration of the Mysteries by such

men as Sophocles and Euripides.”

^40. Ibid., 30.

^41. Walter F. Otto, Die Musen und der göttliche Ursprung des Singens und Sagens

(Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche

Buchgesellschaft, 1961), 47.

^42. John E. Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 3 vols. (London: Cambridge University Press, 1921), 1:105-6.

^43. Dio Chrysostom, Discourse LXXII, 12.

^44. Chrysostom constantly harps on this theme in his discourses delivered at the ancient cult centers which had been converted to

Christian uses.

^45. Pindar, frg. 31, quoted by Aristides, In Defense of Oratory 142D, 420.

^46. Plato, Phaedo 97B-C.

^47. Clementine Recognitions II, 65-67, in PG

1:1278-79.

^48. Dio Chrysostom, Discourse I, 58: Synesius, Dio 10, in PG 66:1145; Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 1:70-72.

^49. Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 1:71.

^50. Pindar, Olympian Odes II, 81-87.

^51. Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 1:71.

^52. See Philostratus II, quoted in Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 1:336.

^53. Pindar, Olympian Odes II, 86-88. On Pindar’s Mantic association see Basil L.

Gildersleeve, Pindar: The Olympian and

Pythian Odes (New York: Harper and

Brothers, 1885), Olympian Odes II, 96-97.

^54. References in Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 1:72, 389; Dio Chrysostom, Discourse 1.

^55. H. W. Garrod, Oxford Book of Latin Verse (London: Oxford University Press, 1952),

ix-x.

^56. Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 1:303.

^57. Francis M. Cornford, Thucydides Mythistoricus (New York: Greenwood,

1969), 201, 221.

^58. Plato, Republic X, 595B, 600E, 607A.

^59. Plato, Meno 99D.

^60. Plato, Apology 22C.

^61. Plato, Laws VII, 809-11.

^62. Plato, Meno 81B.

^63. Plato, Phaedrus 245A.

^64. Werner Jaeger, Aristotle, tr. Richard Robinson (Oxford: Clarendon, 1948), 240-41.

^65. Plutarch, The Oracles at Delphi 22 (405A-D).

^66. Justin Martyr, Discourses to the Greeks 8, in PG 6:256-57.

^67. Erwin Rohde, Psyche: The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks, tr.

W. B. Hillis, 2 vols. (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1966), 2:257, 260, 294-97.

^68. Josephus, Against Apion I, 236: However great his yearning for the gifts of prophecy

and revelation, the Pharaoh knew “that he

would incur the wrath of the gods if he tried

to see them by force.”

^69. Walter Burkert, “Goēs: zum griechischen Schamanismus,” Rheinisches Musuem fur

Philologie 105 (1962): 36-56.

^70. Plato, Phaedo 96A-97B.

^71. Ibid., 97C.

^72. Plato, Sophist 265C.

^73. Plato, Apology 33C.

^74. Plato, Gorgias 523-26.

^75. Ibid., 527A-B.

^76. Plato, Apology 26D.

^77. Ibid., 24B-C, 26C-27E, 31C-D.

^78. Ibid., 23B, 32A, 41A-B.

^79. Plato, Crito 54B-E.

^80. Gaylord Simpson, “The World into Which Darwin Led Us,” Science 131 (April 1960):

974. Cf. Gaylord Simpson, Concession to the Improbable: An Unconventional

Autobiography (London: Yale University Press, 1978), 26.

^81. Plato, Laws IV, 715E-716B.

^82. Edwyn Bevan, Sibyls and Seers (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1929), 99-103,

shows how feeble the Greek Mantic

manifestations were compared with those of

the Hebrew. Socrates’ grateful acceptance of

his Delphic message suggests snatching at

straws; that oracle, as Heraclitus observes

(frg. 11), “neither declares nor conceals, but gives a sign.” At no time does Mantic

inspiration seem to have been general.

Theophilus, To Autolycus III, 384, 7, in PG

6:1132; even the Egyptians were beset by

doubts from the very first, Erich von

Luddeckens, “Untersuchungen über

religiösen Gehalt, Sprache und Form der

ägyptischen Totenklagen,” Mitteillungen des Deutschen Instituts für ägyptische

Altertumskunde in Kairo 11 (1943): 171-72; Speelers, Textes des cercueils, lviii.

^83. For example, the “Greek people never gave up the alluring fancy of a distant land of

blessedness,” Rohde, Psyche, 1:64.

^84. Schmitt, “The Ancient Mysteries,” in Campbell, The Mysteries, 97; Herbert

Braun, “Der Fahrende,” Zeitschrift für

Theologie und Kirche 48 (1951): 32-38; Ejnar Dyggve, “Les traditions cultuelles de

Delphes et l’eglise chrétienne,” Cahiers

Archéologiques 3 (1948): 9-28; Bevan,

Sibyls and Seers, 165-68.

^85. Karl Jaspers, The Origin and Goal of History (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1953), 1.

^86. Lasaulx, in ibid., 8.

^87. J. B. Bury and Russell Meiggs, A History of Greece to the Death of Alexander the Great, 4th ed. (New York: St. Martin’s, 1975), 199.

Cf. Diogenes Laertius, Thales I, 22: “He was the first to receive the name of sage, in

the archonship of Damasias at Athens, when

the term was applied to all Seven Sages.”

^88. Ivan M. Linforth, Solon the Athenian

(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1919), 159.

^89. Ibid., 167.

^90. Ibid., 165-67.

^91. Ibid., 166-69.

^92. C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Macmillan, 1952), 33.

^93. Richard Courant and Herbert Robbins, What is Mathematics? An Elementary Approach

to Ideas and Methods (New York: Oxford University Press, 1941, 1961), xvii-xviii

(emphasis added).

^94. Wallace O. Fenn, “Front Seat for Biologists,”

AIBS Bulletin (December 1960): 16.

^95. Used with reference to Heraclitus in Pseudo-Aristotle, De Mundo (On the Cosmos)

396b20; Cicero, De Finibus Bonorum et

Malorum II, 5, 15.

^96. Heraclitus, On the Universe 41.

^97. Ibid., 69.

^98. Plato, Apology 24C, 26B, 27C, E.

^99. Heraclitus, On the Universe 97.

^100. Ibid., 121.

^101. Ibid., 1.

^102. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata II, 21, in PG 8:1076; in Otto Stählin, ed., Clemens Alexandrinus, 6 vols., 4th ed. (Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1985), 2:184; in Hermann

Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 3

vols, 6th ed. (Berlin: Weidmann, 1951),

1:149.

^103. Hippocrates, The Art XXI, 1-4.

^104. Plato, Lesser Hippias 365B.

^105. Aristotle, Poetics XIX, 7-9.

^106. Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 1:36.

^107. Gilbert Murray, Aristophanes (London: Oxford University Press, 1933), 19-20.

^108. Bury and Meiggs, A History of Greece, 199.

^109. Plutarch, Pericles VI, 1; cf. IV, 4: “But the man who most consorted with Pericles . . .

was Anaxagoras, . . . whom men of that day

used to call ‘Nous,’ . . . because he was the

first to enthrone in the universe, not Chance,

nor yet Necessity, as the source of its orderly arrangement, but Mind ( Nous) pure and simple, which distinguishes and sets

apart, in the midst of an otherwise chaotic

mass, the substances which have like

elements.”

^110. Plato, Gorgias 518-19.

^111. Plato, Republic X, 595B, C, 600E, 607A.

^112. Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 1:52.

^113. H. D. F. Kitto, Sophocles: Dramatist and Philospher (London: Oxford University

Press, 1958); C. M. Bowra, Sophoclean

Tragedy (Oxford: Clarendon, 1944); J. T.

Sheppard, The Oedipus Tyrannus of

Sophocles (Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1920); Letters, The Life and Work of Sophocles.

^114. Letters, The Life and Work of Sophocles, 218, 221 (emphasis added).

^115. Ibid., 226, 229-30.

^116. Ibid., 220.

^117. Ibid., 230.

^118. Pliny, Natural History XXXIII, 82-83; Cicero, De Oratore III, 129; Pausanias, Description of Greece, X, 18, 7.

^119. Schmitt, “The Ancient Mysteries,” 114.

^120. Hugh R. Trevor-Roper, Men and Events (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1957), 313.

^121. András Alföldi, A Conflict of Ideas in the Late Roman empire, tr. Harold Mattingly (Oxford: Clarendon, 1952), 40.

^122. “Notes of Recent Exposition,” Expository Times 73 (1962): 226.

^123. S. Vernon McCasland, “The Unity of the Scriptures,” Journal of Biblical Literature 73 (1954): 6.

^124. E. Cherbonnier, “The Logic of Biblical Anthropomorphism,” Harvard Theological

Review 55 (1962): 190.

^125. Paul Tillich, “Die Wiederentdeckung der prophetischen Tradition in der

Reformation,” Neue Zeitschrift für

systematische Theologie 3 (1961): 237.

^126. Goodenough, Jewish Symbols, 1:18-21.

^127. Life in Other Worlds, A Symposium

Sponsored by Joseph E. Seagram and Sons (1 March 1961).

^128. Robert Graves, Difficult Questions, Easy Answers (New York: Doubleday, 1964), 93.

^129. Hugh W. Nibley, “Victoriosa Loquacitas: The Rise of Rhetoric and the Decline of

Everything Else,” Western Speech 20 (Spring 1956): 76; reprinted in this volume, pages

273-74; Montague R. James, Apocryphal

New Testament (Oxford: Clarendon, 1925), 49, 53-55, 58-60, 70, 80-82, 83, 337-39.

The pseudoscientific element is not lacking,

e.g., in the Pseudo-Callisthenes, Life of

Alexander I, 38, the king sails under the sea in a glass vessel or flies through space, as in Lucian’s trip to the moon sequences in The Dream; cf. Lucian, Zeuxis; cf. Seneca, Controversiae I, 7, 4-5; V, 6; VII, 1, 4-5; IX, 6; X, 3.

^130. Fenn, “Front Seat for Biologists,” 14-16.

^131. Martin Grabmann, Geschichte der scholastischen Methode, 2 vols. (Graz: Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt,

1957).

^132. Ibid.

^133. Louis M. O. Duchesne, The Early History of the Church, tr. Claude Jenkins, 3 vols.

(London: Murray, 1924), 2:1.

^134. Hegesippus, Fragmenta, in PG 5:1321, quoted in Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History IV, 22, in PG 20:377-84.

^135. Alfred N. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World (New York: Macmillan,

1962), 270.

^136. Eduard Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2 vols., 3rd ed. (Leipzig: Teubner, 1915), 2:711-12.

^137. Reinhold Seeberg, Text-Book of the History of Doctrines, vol. 2: History of Doctrines in the Middle and Early Modern Ages (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Book House, 1952), 105.

^138. William Shakespeare, The Tempest, act IV, scene 1, lines 152-56.

^139. Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam, XXXVIII, tr.

Edward Fitzgerald.

^140. Goethe, Faust, 454.

Paths That Stray: Some Notes on Sophic and Mantic

Part 1: Introduction through

Proposition 4

The purpose of the excerpts that follow

is to save the student time—years of it, in

some cases—that would normally be taken

up with endless bull sessions, lonely heart

searchings, and very little research. The

quotations that make up most of our text are

taken from eminent authorities and are meant

to help the student make up his own mind.

The modern references cluster around the

turn of the decade, 1959-60, when the

Darwin Centennial was being celebrated, at

which time I gathered them in response to

challenges by students and teachers alike to

justify my reluctance to teach certain

generally accepted propositions.

The natural objection to a handful of old notecards flung in the reader’s face is that

most of the quotations are bound to be out of

date and that the people who made them

would today be considered questionable

authorities, if they ever were taken seriously.

But since Science is not a subject but a

method, every scientist, regardless of his

specialty or rank, can in a way speak for

Science—and does. The important thing,

however, is that we are dealing here not with

the old donnybrook between science and

religion but with the ancient confrontation of Sophic and Mantic. The Sophic is simply the

art of solving problems without the aid of

any superhuman agency, which the Mantic,

on the other hand, is willing to solicit or

accept. Our civilization today is

“sophically” oriented, though far from

dedicated to scientific thought. Allen

Wheelis begins his book The End of the

Modern Age with a statement in italics: “The vision which has determined the Modern

Age is this: Man can know the world by the unaided effort of reason. " 1 This conviction dominates every field of thought. Thus on the

dust cover of Mrs. Fawn M. Brodie’s highly

inaccurate biography of Joseph Smith, No

Man Knows My History, Mr. Bernard

DeVoto makes a stirring sales pitch as he

proclaims the author to be eminently

trustworthy as “a detached, modern

intelligence, grounded in naturalism,

rejecting the supernatural.” 2 No matter what one’s field, whether science, scholarship,

literature, or art, one must “reject the

supernatural” to be taken seriously.

That the pitfalls of both Sophic and

Mantic are shared equally by scientists and

religionists in our day, who both singly and

together ignore the blessings of both ways of

thought, is the theme of the instructive

reflections of the British biologist G. A.

Kerkut, who writes: “The serious

undergraduate of the previous centuries was

brought up on a theological diet from which

he would learn to have faith and to quote

authorities when he was in doubt. Intelligent

understanding was the last thing required.

The undergraduate of today is just as bad; he

is still the same opinion-swallowing grub. . .

. Regardless of his subject, be it

Engineering, Physics, English, or Biology, he

will have faith in theories that he only dimly follows and will call upon various

authorities to support what he does not

understand. In this he differs not one bit from the irrational theology student of the bygone

age. . . . But what is worse, the present-day

student claims to be different . . . in that he thinks scientifically and despises dogma. ”3

And today the theology student also thinks

scientifically and is not a whit behind the

aspiring scientist in being “grounded in naturalism, rejecting the supernatural,” the

unqualified acceptance of which has always

been the principal charge of the ministry

against the Mormons. So let the reader

beware of confusing the issues of science

and religion as they are debated in our

present-day society with the perennial

confrontation of Sophic and Mantic which

lies behind it all. The few quotations that

follow, a mere sampling, are to indicate

where the age-old confrontation has led us in

the past.

For anyone who pays attention to “the

lessons of history,” few parallels could be

more instructive than that between the Greek

experience and our own in the confrontation

of Mantic and Sophic. The vastness of our

subject can best be encompassed in a series

of propositions and subpropositions, with a

few lyrical digressions.

Proposition 1. Greek writers speak of two ways of viewing the world, which can be designated as Mantic and Sophic. A like

dichotomy characterizes modern thought.

Definition: Sources in Liddell and

Scott’s Greek-English Lexicon4 under

“mantic” (mantikos) use that word as

indicating what is inspired, revealed,

oracular, prophetic, or divinatory. The word

sophic, used to signify that which men learn by their own unaided wits, though attested, is very rare, but we shall use it in place of its common synonyms “sophistic” and

“philosophic”5 to avoid the confusing connotations which cling to them. Dio

Chrysostom characterizes the degenerate

education of his day as being “neither

mantic, nor sophistic, nor even rhetorical,”

those being the three accepted categories of

study. 6 “Philosophy had two beginnings,”

writes Diogenes Laertius, the one

represented by Anaximander, the other by Pythagoras; 7 the former sought to explain everything by investigation of the physis, the physical universe alone (see the next

section), the latter held on the other hand that only God really knows what is what, the

philosopher being merely his messenger. 8

“One man,” said Solon, wisest of the

Greeks, “receives from the Olympian Muses

the gift of inspired sophia that men strive for, and another from Apollo the mantic gift of prophecy,” 9 making the same distinction as Empedocles: “True reason is either divine or

human; the former is inexpressible, the latter available to discussion,” 10 i.e., Mantic and Sophic respectively.

As will appear from the quotations that

follow, the modern world makes the same

distinction, usually under the titles of science (Sophic) and religion (Mantic).

Proposition 2. The foundation of Sophic thinking was the elimination of the

supernatural or superhuman, i.e., anything that could not be weighed, measured, or

sensed objectively, from a description of the

real world.

A. This means that the Universe runs

itself without any conscious direction.

Modern Statements: “Today we have a

new conception of the universe as self-

governed and self-regulating, . . . instead of the relatively restricted universe of our

traditional conception.” 11 “Man is the expression of universal, organic, social and

personal formative tendencies in a world of

accidents.” 12 “The cosmos itself is patternless, being a jumble of random and

disordered events.” 13 “The final and natural state of things is a completely random

distribution of matter. Any kind of order . . .

is unnatural and happens only by chance encounters that reverse the general trend. ”14

Ancient Statements: The Greek Sophic

began with the study of the physics as

comprising all things; Anaximander’s

apeiron (“the boundless”) by definition included everything, with no possibility of

any power, influence, or substance being

unaccounted for, and this all-in-all was

purely physical in nature, a soma. 15 His successors in the Milesian school all sought

to explain the basic substance and creative

power of the universe in terms of one

element or another—but it was always a

physical element. 16 They asked the question: What picture of the world do we get if we

leave all supernatural (Mantic) elements out

of our investigations? Since Mantic things

cannot be weighed and measured, let us

proceed as if they did not exist. What picture of the world would we get? This was a

loaded question, since the fact of the discovery of anything could be taken as absolute proof that the assumption of God

and the supernatural was unnecessary in

arriving at significant conclusions, hence

expendable, hence useless baggage, hence a

mere holdover from ages of superstition, and

finally a pernicious nuisance to be swept

into the trashbin as soon as possible. The

Mantic and Sophic do not get along well

together. “Did the natural world [physis]

come into being without cause or grow up

without any directing mind or consciousness

[dianoias], as everybody believes today, or was it by thought [logos] and divine

knowledge [epistemas theias], by God?” 17

“When I [Socrates] was young . . . I was

completely devoted to the intellectual quest,

as they call the investigation of the physical world. . . . I was convinced that I could

know . . . how everything comes into

existence. . . . I knew that the brain was the seat of sensation, thought, and hence of

knowledge itself, and that one need look no

further for the answer to everything. ”18 The

“classical Greek atomists [were] . . . guilty .

. . of the impossible attempts to explain

everything by matter and motion.” 19 After Hippocrates, the medics “taught that demons

had nothing to do with sickness, but humors

and vapors were the sole cause of

disease.” 20 This was the characteristic attitude of the Sophic.

B. Whether intentionally or not, the Sophic position was necessarily

antireligious.

Modern Statements: “Of all possible

schemes of the universe the one most hostile

to religion was that sponsored by the science

of the nineteenth and early twentieth

centuries.” 21 The scientific view of the

universe had three main foundations: (1) matter, as the only form of reality, (2)

mechanical, as the only kind of law, and (3)

evolution, as an automatic process.

“Discouraging for humanity, the implications

are disastrous for religion. ”22 “The earth has changed throughout its history under the

action of material forces only, and of the

same forces as those now visible to us” ;23

this teaching has “reduced the sway of

superstition in the conceptual world of

human lives.” 24 “Darwin’s greatest contribution” was to see that “evolution can

be explained in terms of causality alone and

does not require any teleological

conceptions.” 25 “The origin and growth of organisms has been natural, not in the least

supernatural. The primeval lightning, . . .

gases, . . . ultra-violet sunlight participated, .

. . and . . . here we are! ”26 “No religious dogma, such as primitive revelation, may be

introduced as a scientific ethnological explanation.” We must not reduce “the

humanistic science of culture to theology.” 27

“The issue of mortality versus immortality is

crucial in the argument of Humanism against

supernaturalism” 28 (note here how Humanism is completely committed not to

the Mantic but to the Sophic line).

Ancient Statements: “Ionic philosophy

was in conscious opposition . . . to the

cosmological, mythological poets and . . .

rejected everything theological,

mythological, or mystical, seeking to explain

the origin of the universe and its

development in purely physical terms of

natural philosophy.” 29 Protagoras, in the spirit of such scientific philosophers as

Xenophanes, Heraclitus, and the Eleatic

school, “attacked every illusion, every

tradition, by insisting on truth, clarity,

objectivity, consistency, and neatness in

thinking and speech.” 30 He emphasized honesty and uprightness, but “at the same

time robbed them of their religious

foundations. He recommends old-fashioned

honesty, but does not want any old-fashioned

ideas to go with it.” 31 Of him Plato said,

“You can’t fool the gods either by flattery or neglect.” 32 Thus, Protagoras’s unsparing attacks on Homer as a moral guide,

following the example of the Ionian

scientists, inevitably brought discredit on

religion itself,33 so that intelligent people, following the teaching of the Sophists, were

expected to debunk and ridicule any old

values or beliefs as a matter of course. Thus

Protagoras says that the opening line of the

Iliad is not a prayer at all, as it is supposed to be, being in the imperative case, to which

Aristotle replies in essence, “So what? Any

fool can see that it is a prayer.” 34 Xenophon protests the teaching of Homer and Hesiod

that “happiness [is] dependent on the will of Heaven,” maintaining that man makes his

own happiness and is dependent on no one. 35

Behind such hair-splitting criticism was

always an air of superior knowledge: Crete

had one hundred cities in the Iliad but only ninety in the Odyssey; in the Iliad, the sun-god is said by the poet to see everything—

yet in the Odyssey he has to send out

messengers; the gods drink unmixed nectar,

yet Calypso mixes a draught for Hermes—it

is the smart-alec debunking like that of our

own H. L. Mencken of the 1920s and

1930s. 36 Trivial attacks on the morality of the Greek scriptures were nonetheless

devastating: Hippias prefers the “frank and

straightforward” Achilles to the “wily and

false Odysseus. ”37 Zoilus defends the Cyclops, berates Odysseus and Apollo, and

finds all sorts of flaws and inconsistencies in Homer—why does God permit innocent

dogs and mules to be killed? 38 It was petty and peevish, and sensationally successful.

Almost overnight the new smart

sophistication became “the common property

of educated people” in all Greece.39

C. Specifically, the Sophic dispensed with the need for God.

Modern Statements: When Napoleon

asked Laplace how God fit into his

cosmology, he replied: “Sire, je n’ai pas eu

besoin de cette hypothese”—his system had

no need for a God-hypothesis. 40 Newton saw that mechanical hypotheses “lead straight

away towards atheism. Mechanical

hypotheses concerning gravity, as a matter of

fact, deny God’s action in the world and

push him out of it. ”41 “Evolution is a fully natural process, inherent in the physical

properties of the universe.” 42 “Life may conceivably be happier for some people in

the older worlds of superstition. It is possible that some children are made happy

by a belief in Santa Claus, but adults should

prefer to live in a world of reality and

reason.” 43 “It seemed as though the machines man had invented made him more secure. . . .

He was ceasing to be (as the English farmer

complained in describing his occupation)

‘too dependent on the Almighty.’” 44 “Thus we must make an effort to achieve this new

conception of a self-regulating, self-

governed universe requiring no supreme

ruler or ad hoc causes and forces to keep it running. ”45 “Evolution now becomes not only the Source of Comfort and Reassurance

. . . the Immanent and Omnipresent Creator . .

. [but] all the wonders which for Archdeacon

Paley were evidences of the existence of

God can on this view be put to the credit of

Evolution.” 46 “The Infinite Universe of the New Cosmology . . . inherited all the

ontological attributes of Divinity. Yet only those—all the others the departed God took

away with Him.” 47

Ancient Statements: From Anaxagoras

the scientist, Pericles learned “to despise all the superstitious fears which the awe-inspiring signs of the heaven arouse in those

ignorant of the causes of such things, who . . .

let their apprehensions about the gods throw

them into a sorry state of alarm.” 48 “Whereas the superstitious person, when he gets sick,

resigns himself to the will of Heaven, the

atheist tries to remember what he ate or

drank.” 49 In exercising their right and duty to debunk everything, the Sophists inevitably

zeroed in on God: for all their pious

dedication the net result of their teaching

was a sterile atheism.50 Dependence on God was supplanted by dependence on oneself.

Critias in his lost play Sisyphus said the gods were the invention of some primitive

politician, to keep the mob in line by fear of Some One in the sky.

Proposition 3. Having dismissed the

Mantic, the Sophic becomes impatient of its

lingering survival, which it views with

uncompromising hostility.

A. Superimposed on ancient tradition,

the Sophic teaching claims to bring

emancipation to the human mind from hoary

superstition, and in so doing creates its own

facile evolutionary pattern of history.

Modern Statements: “Of all

antagonisms of belief, the oldest, the widest, the most profound, and the most important, is

that between Religion and Science. It

commenced when the recognition of the

simplest uniformities in surrounding things

set a limit to the once universal

supersition. ”51 Thanks to Darwin, “instead of the gracious half-divine figures of the

Golden Age . . . we are shown a breed of

hairy gorilla-like creatures, huddling and jibbering in caves; . . . undoubtedly modern

man is a much more complex being than

primitive man. He has developed a much

wider and subtler range of sensibilities and

interests.” 52 “These beliefs are survivals of an ancient animistic tradition which has for

so long directed human thinking about the

universe. . . . As an escape from this

conception, scientific studies and

formulations have, since the days of

Copernicus and Galileo, sought for order

and regularity in nature.” 53 But some scholars have balked at this idea. “Illusions

of grandeur take a number of forms,”

including “that which exalts our own age at

the expense of all past ages. ”54 We must “rid ourselves of the pious superstition of our

grandfathers that we have made splendid

progress and that the pitiful early centuries

lie . . . in the dense fog of their own

imperfection.” 55

Ancient Statements: Western

civilization began with Hellenism and

should be called “Rationalistic

Civilization.” “All the development of

knowledge, of command over the forces of

Nature, . . . has had for its moving principle a rationalism whose origin is to be found in

the Greek citystates.” 56 Few students are aware today that the ancient Sophists painted

a picture of “primitive man,” the hairy cave-

man, exactly matching that which we get

from Darwin. 57 Thales, the founder of Greek science, congratulated himself “that he was

born a Greek and not a barbarian.” The

philosophers followed suit, regarding

themselves just as naturally superior to other races as to monkeys and ants.58 “Seneca does not have to read the ancients to

condemn them—the moderns are superior as

such. " 59 Shahrastani divides the Rationalists and Philosophers into (1) Sophists, (2)

Natural Scientists, (3) Materialists. What all have in common is the rejection of

revelation. 60

B. Arising as a protest to the Mantic, the Sophic always depends on polemic for its appeal; it feeds on the Mantic and is

negative and dependent in nature.

Modern Statements: “No less severe

was his [Lamarck’s] philosophical hostility

amounting to hatred for the tradition of the

Deluge and the Biblical creation story,

indeed for everything which recalled the

Christian theory of nature.” 61 Darwin claimed, “I had gradually come, by this time,

to see that the Old Testament from its

manifestly false history of the world . . . was no more to be trusted than the sacred books

of the Hindoos, or the beliefs of any

barbarian, . . . that the men at that time were ignorant and credulous to a degree almost

incomprehensible by us. . . . Thus disbelief

crept over me at a very slow rate, but was at

last complete. . . . I felt no distress, and have never since doubted even for a single second

that my conclusion was correct.” 62 This was in 1836-39, when Darwin was still in his

twenties and had as yet done none of his

scientific work—yet already his mind was

made up for all time; the negative part of his doctrine was fixed, and in that negative part

lies his supreme contribution to

knowledge. 63 “Darwin’s supreme achievement was to make compelling the

inference that evolution has in fact taken place. . . . Providing a basis for mechanistic interpretation, it helped to free biology of

animistic influence.” 64 Without something to ridicule, the Sophic loses much of its appeal.

In his novel The Affair, C. P. Snow describes

the quintessential intellectual: “The old man was happy. He felt as though back in the

Cambridge of the Nineties, when unbelief,

rude, positive unbelief, was fun.” 65 “No man of ‘unquestioning faith’ can be a member in

good standing of a true university. . . . A man who is not prepared to challenge (earnestly,

respectfully, fearlessly) The Wealth of

Nations or Das Kapital, The Koran or The Book of Mormon . . . is at heart no scholar and no scientist.” 66 Note that challenging these things means to reject them outright,

i.e., not seriously to challenge them at all.

John Stuart Mill, reading the Gospel of John,

laid it aside “before he reached the 6th

Chapter, with the comment: ‘This is poor

stuff.’” 67

Ancient Statements: When Epicurus

was fourteen years old (as with Darwin in

his twenties) and his teachers could not

answer his questions about the original

chaos of Hesiod, he turned away from religion to philosophy for the rest of his

life.68 Lucian “ridicules the ancient poets for pretending to be inspired interpreters of the

will of heaven.” 69 His commonsense ridiculing of old customs and beliefs made

Lucian a great favorite of the Byzantine

period and the Renaissance. 70 Andocides, an ambitious and unscrupulous operator, found

fame and notoriety through his association

with a group of individuals accused of

damaging the Hermes and making fun of

everything; he even joined the Eleusinian

mysteries in order to expose them. 71 After Augustus, smart Romans looked back on Old

Latin literature with loathing, since it lacked the Greek sophistication. 72 Entering the scene as frank, searching, brilliant,

irreverent, unabashed thinkers,73 the Sophists started out by lambasting Homer, the most

revered voice of all,74 but the Sophic practitioners became a crashing bore when

they had nothing to attack but were left to

their own studies, tedious and hypercritical

as they are. Compare Plato’s Apology, Crito, Gorgias, and Protagoras on the essential barrenness of the Sophic.

Proposition 4. Claiming magisterial authority, the Sophic acknowledges no possibility of defeat or rivalry. In principle it can never be wrong. Its confidence is

absolute.

A. Successive failures in no wise

discourage it.

Modern Statements: In 1954, Alfred

North Whitehead noted, “Since the turn of

the century I have lived to see every one of

the basic assumptions of both [science and

mathematics] set aside; . . . and all this in

one lifespan. . . . And yet, in the face of that, the discoverers of the new hypotheses in

science are declaring, ‘Now at last, we have certitude’—when some of the assumptions which we have seen upset had endured for

more than twenty centuries.” 75 “Each new fashion or advancement in research was

hailed as just the thing to solve all life’s

mysteries. . . . Always just around the corner was the answer to all the riddles.” 76 But the modern Sophists insist in carrying on in this

way: “To cry ‘We are ignorant’ is safe and

healthy, but to cry ‘we shall be ignorant’ in

the future is rash and foolish”; “he who

declares that they [ any problems] can never be solved by the scientific method is to my

mind as rash as the man [who] . . . declared

it utterly impossible [to talk] across the

Atlantic Ocean. ”77 “So science has, it seems, been so successful that it has inevitably

earned a great and strange reputation. . . .

Presumably these scientists are both so

clever and so wise that they can do anything.

Perhaps we should turn the world over to this superbreed.” 78

Ancient Statements: The sublime

confidence of the Sophist in his powers is a

stock theme in the Lives of the Philosophers.

The art of rhetoric was constructed to

guarantee that no Sophist would ever have to

admit defeat.79

B. Even when its most confident claims are discredited and its predictions fail, the

Sophic remains unrepentant: those who

admit that natural selection is not the answer go on insisting that it is still the first article of faith.

Modern Statements: It is repeatedly

stated that Darwin’s greatest contribution

was the concept of natural selection as

providing the mechanistic explanation of

creation and evolution.80 Yet admittedly natural selection does not work: “Even after

his great discovery of the operation of evolution through natural selection he

[Darwin] still believed in Lamarck’s

doctrine of evolution through the inheritance

of acquired characters, a doctrine his own

work had rendered superfluous and indeed

erroneous. ”81 “Since Darwin wrote, his theory of natural selection has been

constantly in the minds of naturalists, who

have designed, but never satisfactorily

carried out, experiments to show that natural

selection does in fact occur. ”82 “It has been difficult to realize that . . . there is a

considerable and, it is fair to say, steadily

growing realization that natural selection is

not, and can never have been, that principal

cause of evolution that it is still too often

claimed to be.” 83 “We are ignorant of the causes and mechanisms of variation. ”84

“Today, A. H. Mueller, M. D. Newell, and

G. G. Simpson are teaching contradictory to

Darwin’s doctrine of gradual evolution. ”85

Likewise, uniformitarianism, once “the great

underlying principle of modern geology,” 86

is being supplanted by the new plate

tectonics, 87 but the Sophic does not apologize for its past mistakes.

Ancient Statements: In their attempts to explain everything in terms of matter, the

Ionic “physicists” soon formed conflicting

schools; and Heraclitus showed them the

contradictions and limitations implicit in

their program, the inadequacy of human

senses and instruments,88 the relativity of things,89 the necessity of accepting fallible human consensus as proof. For his services

Heraclitus was dubbed skoteinos, which means the obscure, the wet blanket, the

trouble-maker; in other words they

dismissed him as a crank.90 Hippocrates represents the never-say-I’m-sorry attitude

of the Sophics. The foundation of his system was the doctrine that there are no causes

except physical causes to anything. 91 He is so positive as to condemn all religious cures

as sacrilege and all apparent miracles as

tricks.92 Where his own theories break down and his methods fail, he rejects criticism: It was not the method but the disease that was to blame. 93 “Think how much worse things would have been without my

prescriptions.” 94 The scientific cure is always the right one—whether it works or

not!95

C. The Sophic remains undismayed by

setbacks, because it puts complete faith in

the ultimate infallibility of mechanistic

explanations.

Modern Statements: “I think it more

reasonable to doubt a mathematical theorem

than a well-established case of evolution,

e.g., that of the horse.” 96 As soon as nineteenth-century science “scented a piece

of mechanism [it would] . . . exclaim, ‘Here

we are getting to bedrock. This is what

things should resolve themselves into. This

is ultimate reality,’” and such was also

Darwin’s attitude.97 “The advocates of each new fashion or approach to biological

problems nearly always assume that what

they have worked out . . . must of necessity be true for all plants or animals. ”98 When Jacques Boucher in 1832 collected a few

stone hand axes and other flints he entitled

his five-volume catalogue of them On the

Creation—a few chipped flints explain how everything came into being. 99 “Physics, not so very long ago (and with chemistry as a

kind of subsidiary), considered the world as

a type of great machine. . . . The fact that

many of the leaders of thought have moved

on well ahead of that point of view has not

yet been as widely appreciated as it should be.” 100 The fact that “the paleontological record is horrifyingly incomplete” does not

dampen the confidence of scientists, who

“feel sure what this research is leading up

to. ”101 The infallibility of our objectivity permits even prophetic license. Bacon wants

to believe that physical things cannot be

manipulated by an observer, as words can,

even though he suspects that that is wishful

thinking. 102 Men should, he says, experiment and “bid farewell to sophistical doctrines”;

but how is experimental knowledge

conveyed and evaluated if not by the very

same words that the philosophers have

always abused? 103

The Sophic even teaches that it is better

to get the wrong answer by its methods than

the right answer by any other! Thus while

Neville George admits that natural selection

was not a successful explanation of how

things happen, he still insists that it was

“Darwin’s supreme achievement” because it

inferred a “mechanistic” instead of an

“animistic” explanation that justified

“conviction of the fact of evolution. ”104 All efforts by the geologists of Trinity College to discover water for a well on campus failed;

a local dowser was called in and succeeded

immediately. “There is no doubt of the

reality of the dowsing effect,” wrote

Trinity’s J. J. Thompson, but the dowser

could not be tolerated because no physical

explanation had been found. “Although . . .

the reality of dowsing” is conceded, “there

is no agreement about its cause,” and so the

dons indignantly denounced the dowsing. 105

We must necessarily view all things which

we cannot explain “as unreal, as vain

imaginings of the untrained human mind,”

which since “they could not be described

scientifically . . . were in themselves

contradictory and absurd.” 106 Newton got the right answers, but scientists refused to

accept his explanation, which embarrassed

them: “We cannot deny [as Newton did] that

attraction belongs to matter just because we

do not understand how it works. ”107 But how can we affirm it either, if we do not

understand it? Newton’s position is rejected

for only one reason—that it leaves open the

possibility of the supernatural.

Ancient Statements: A Baconian faith in pure observation, unencumbered by

preconceptions or prejudices, is expressed

by Lucretius: “The size and temperature of

the sun’s disk are no greater and no smaller,

nor can they be, than exactly what they

appear to be to our senses. ”108 The same holds true of the moon—it is exactly what it

appears to be.109 “O miserable human race, to attribute such things to the gods! ”110 “The

sun is just a stone, and the moon a piece of earth.” 111

“The radical error of Classicism is to

suppose that the history of mankind can

properly be apprehended in terms applicable

to the study of ‘objects’ in ‘nature,’ i.e., in the light of the conventional concepts of form and matter.” 112 All other types of belief are only for women, children, and slaves. 113

Pouring contempt on every other

approach to knowledge but his own,

Hippocrates debunks such popular

superstitions as that garlic and onions have

an effect on the human system, 114 that the wearing of black has a depressing effect on

people, 115 that a religious state of mind can have an effect in fasting and healing, 116 and that the painting of the trunks of fruit trees with red litharge will give an improved fruit

crop.117 Why red? Why not any other color?

he asks. He rejects all these “superstitions”

(though all are fully justified by centuries of testing) because he cannot explain in each

case why it should be so;118 medicine is not satisfied to know that a thing works and to

know what happens; as a true science it must

know why. 119 Other doctors claim to be as scientific as he and give different

explanations for things in the name of

science;120 his own explanations of everything in terms of the four humors have

caused infinite mischief, but for that he does not apologize, insisting that one should

always use the scientific cure even when it

does not work and avoid a traditional

remedy even when it does. 121 He commends the peasants for tying rocks to the branches

of olive trees not because it makes them

easier to harvest, but because the weight of

the rocks will by attraction cause the trees to bear a heavier weight of fruit—that is, their

reasons are better than his, but he is the scientist. Maimonides further deplores the

prescribing of certain superstitious cures by

the rabbis “since though experience has

shown that they work, reason cannot explain

why.” 122 Hippocrates concludes his great work on the Sacred Diseases with the

warning that the one thing to avoid is

“purifications, incantations, or any other kind of vulgar or popular cure,” whether they

work or not. 123

D. To remain invulnerable to all attack, the Sophic has provided itself with certain

useful escape hatches, which it denies to the Mantic.

Modern Statements: P. T. Mora writes

that he believes that moderns have

developed “what I call the practice of

infinite escape clauses . . . to avoid facing

the conclusion that the probability of a self-

producing state [matter alone in charge] is

zero. . . . These escape clauses postulate an almost infinite amount of time and . . .

material (monomers), so that even the most

unlikely event could have happened. . . . By such logic we can prove anything.” 124

“Darwin, Huxley, Tyndale, and others,” all

draw these blank checks on time, “if enough

space and time were available, it could

happen and even happen frequently. ”125 The key to the sly circular argument is the word

“enough.” “Can all complexity be reduced to

simplicity as in physics if we work hard

enough? . . . What rubbish that it was once

thought so! . . . Such illogicality . . . was

never apparent then, back in the days when .

. . the Encyclopedia for the Unity of Science was first appearing . . . from Chicago.” 126

The tautological argument was never

allowed to the Mantic: “It is the triumph of

Geology, as a science, to have demonstrated

that we do not need to refer to vast,

unknown, and terrible causes the relief features of the earth, but that known agencies at work today are competent to produce

them, provided they have enough time. " 127

How much time was necessary? Enough to

do the job, whatever it was! One escape is

simply to admit an anomaly and go right on

as if nothing had happened; thus Marshall D.

Sahlins confidently predicted the results of

an experiment which was faulted drastically:

to describe the debacle he uses such words

as “startling,” “extraordinary,” and

“remarkable,” noting that the outcome

“suggests a startling conclusion,” the

opposite to what was expected. Yet he easily

readjusts the new facts to provide proof

instead of refutation for his hard-hit

theory. 128 As Bacon observes, this is a dangerously easy thing for any scientist to

do. Thus William W. Howells, having

declared that Darwin was right on a point,

adds, “Curiously, however, it is extremely difficult to find demonstrable, or even

logically appealing, adaptive advantages in

racial features”129—as if admitting the anomaly takes care of it. Darwin used the

same simple escape hatch of passing basic

questions by in silence: “Darwin did not

seek to account for variations. . . .

Variations, then, are a necessary condition of the functioning of the evolutionary process.

Yet apparently they are causeless . . . from

the standpoint of the concepts of mechanical

causation, which is the only kind of

causation that science recognizes.” 130 An important escape hatch has always been

“wait and see”; as each new mechanism was

discovered it was treated as a nail in the

coffin of religion if not its death blow; and

as each mechanism failed to explain, it was

argued that there would always be new ones

discovered, that the discovery of past

mechanisms guaranteed that we were moving in the right direction, and whether we came

to the final cause sooner or later, we at least had enough to dismiss all nonmaterial

elements from our calculations. 131

More sweeping is Harlow Shapley’s

escape clause: Life occurs automatically

wherever the conditions are right. Therefore

there is no need for explaining the origin of

life in terms of the miraculous or the

supernatural. “Where conditions are right,

there is chemical evidence that essential

complex materials which appear

spontaneously leave no reason whatever to

invoke the miraculous.” Here the unknown-x

“spontaneous” takes the place of unknown-x

“miraculous.” What is the difference?—

purely that between the Sophic and Mantic

attitude, a perfect circular argument: if

“conditions are right” glaciers will appear in the midst of the Sahara. We must assume that

conditions are right for everything that ever was or happened, and there is no reason why

conditions should not include God and

angels. In the same spirit Sir Gavin de Beer

turns the extreme inefficiency of the

evolutionary process to prove not that its

inexorable laws are not doing the job but that there is no “design, purpose, or guidance” in

the universe, which would never bungle

so!132 A new escape clause for the evolutionists is that human evolution, instead of being mechanical, has since the

emergence of Homo sapiens been

consciously influenced and artificially

controlled by human will. “Consciously

directed co-operativeness has been the

major factor which determined the

evolutionary origin of Homo sapiens. . . . It may be said, indeed, that if man (in the

broadest sense) invented culture, it was

culture which invented Homo sapiens. "133

“Man is a being who has domesticated himself, thereby placing himself outside the

brutish functioning of natural selection. ”134

There is a controlling mind after all? No,

this is simply a mechanical process, since

man himself is a product of purely

mechanical forces—and so around in the

circle. It has become common practice to

appeal to the possibility of life on other

worlds as proof of no divine intervention; 135

but to Latter-day Saints it has always proved

just the opposite.

Ancient Statements: “In the middle of

the fifth century B.C.,—when in turn the

unrestricted imagination of the Ionian

philosophers had failed to explain the riddle

of existence on physical grounds . . .

philosophy fell somewhat into disrepute. A

spirit of skepticism spread over the Greek

world, and the greatest thinkers, foiled in

their attempts to discover the higher truths,

turned their attention to the practical side of education.” 136 The new education, however, retained and intensified the critical, negative, irreligious element and intellectual prestige

of science. A like phenomenon is found

today: “The hypothesis of natural selection

has, also for a variety of reasons, gradually

acquired a not altogether healthy degree of

prestige, which is hard to break down. It has

become, if only by reiteration, so firmly

ensconced as part of our general outlook on

nature that it needs real determination to cast doubt on it. Biologists are conditioned to it

from their earliest education.” 137 It is not the content but the mood, the overconfidence, the

negative power of the Sophic that is virtually indestructible. Thus, however the Doctors

disagree, the basic hard-headed principle of

medicine remains. For Hippocrates it is:

Believe only what you see!138 But, he is careful to provide his escape clauses.

Notes to Part 1

These notes were compiled around

1963 in outline fashion and were intended

as an aid in research.

Footnotes

^1. Allen Wheelis, The End of the Modern Age (New York: Basic Books, 1971), 3.

^2. Fawn M. Brodie, No Man Knows My History (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1946).

^3. G. A. Kerkut, ed., Implications of Evolution, International Series of Monographs on Pure

and Applied Biology; Division: Zoology, vol.

4 (New York: Pergamon, 1960), 3.

^4. Henry G. Liddell and Robert Scott, Greek-English Lexicon (London: Oxford

University Press, 1975).

^5. Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers I, 12.

^6. Dio Chrysostom, Discourse XII, 15.

^7. Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent

Philosophers I, 13.

^8. Ibid., I, 12.

^9. Stobaeus, Eclogues III, 9, 23, lines 51-53, in Ivan Linforth, Solon the Athenian

(Berkeley: University of California Press,

1919), 167-68.

^10. Sextus Empiricus, Against the Logicians I, 122.

^11. Lawrence K. Frank, Nature and Human Nature (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers

University Press, 1951), 39.

^12. Lancelot L. Whyte, Accent on Form (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1954), 125.

^13. Lyall Watson, Supernature (New York: Doubleday, 1973), 8.

^14. Ibid., 5.

^15. Aristotle, Physics III, 8, 208a.

^16. Aristotle, Metaphysics I, 3, 983b.

^17. Plato, Sophist 265C.

^18. Plato, Phaedo 96A-C.

^19. Alexandre Koyré, From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins, 1957), 213.

^20. Philostorgius, Historia Ecclesiastica VIII, 10, in PG 65:564.

^21. Cyril E. M. Joad, God and Evil (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1943), 108.

^22. Ibid., 113-14.

^23. George G. Simpson, “The World into Which Darwin Led Us,” Science 131 (April 1960): 967.

^24. Ibid.

^25. Hans Reichenbach, The Rise of Scientific Philosophy (Berkeley: University of

California Press, 1951), 199.

^26. Harlow Shapley, in Life in Other Worlds, A Symposium Sponsored by Joseph E.

Seagram and Sons (1 March 1961): 27.

^27. David Bidney, “The Ethnology of Religion and the Problem of Human Evolution,”

American Anthropologist 56 (February

1954): 17.

^28. Corliss Lamont, The Philosophy of Humanism, 4th ed. (New York:

Philosophical Library, 1957), 68.

^29. Theodor Hopfner, Orient und griechische

Philosophie (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1925), 65.

^30. Wilhelm Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur (Munich: Beck,

1940), 3:1:1:38.

^31. Ibid., 3:1:1:37.

^32. Plato, Republic II, 365D.

^33. Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur, 1:1:129-30.

^34. Aristotle, Poetics XIX, 7-9.

^35. John E. Sandys, A History of Classical Scholarship, 3 vols. (New York: Hafner, 1958), 1:29.

^36. Ibid., 1:36.

^37. Plato, Lesser Hippias 365B.

^38. Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 1:33, 108-9.

^39. Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur, 3:1:1:38.

^40. Koyré, From the Closed World, 276.

^41. Ibid., 234.

^42. Simpson, “The World,” 969.

^43. Ibid., 974.

^44. Joseph W. Krutch, “If You Don’t Mind My Saying So . . .,” American Scholar 35

(Spring 1966): 182.

^45. Frank, Nature and Human Nature, 39-40.

^46. Stephen Toulmin, “Contemporary Scientific Mythology,” in Metaphysical Beliefs

(London: SCM, 1957), 61.

^47. Koyré, From the Closed World, 276.

^48. Plutarch, Pericles VI, 1.

^49. Plutarch, Superstition 168B-C.

^50. Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur, 3:1:1:37.

^51. Herbert Spencer, First Principles (New York: Appleton, 1882), 11.

^52. Edwyn Bevan, Hellenism and Christianity (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1921),

191-93.

^53. Frank, Nature and Human Nature, [146].

^54. Robert L. Schuyler, “Man’s Greatest Illusion,” Proceedings of the American

Philosophical Society 92 (1948): 50; cf.

Georgio de Santillana, The Origins of

Scientific Thought (Chicago: University of

Chicago Press, 1961), 7-20.

^55. Paul Herrmann, Conquest by Man, tr.

Michael Bullock (New York: Harper and

Brothers, 1954), 9.

^56. Bevan, Hellenism and Christianity, 14-15.

^57. Lucretius, De Rerum Natura V, 925-1010; Seneca, Epistles XC, 7; Vitruvius, On Architecture II, 1; Firmicus, Disputationes Adversus Astrologiam Divinatricem III, 1; E. D. Phillips, “The Greek Version of

Prehistory,” Antiquity 38 (September 1964): 171-78.

^58. Nicephorus Gregor, Byzantina Historia VIII, 8, in PG 148:569.

^59. Eduard Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2 vol., 3rd ed. (Leipzig: Teubner, 1915), 1:308-9.

^60. Shahrastani II, 201, in O. D. Chwolsohn (Khvol’son), Die Ssabier und der

Ssabismus, 2 vols. (St. Petersburg:

Buchdruckerei der Kaiserlichen Akademie

der Wissenschaften, 1856), 2:419.

^61. Sainte-Beuve, quoted in Charles C. Gillispie,

“Lamarck and Darwin in the History of

Science,” The American Scientist 46

(December 1958): 397.

^62. Charles Darwin, The Autobiography of Charles Darwin: 1809-1882 (New York:

Harcourt, Brace, 1958), 85-87.

^63. Cf. Ibid., 87, n. 1.

^64. T. Neville George, Evolution in Outline (London: Thrift Books, 1951), 16 (emphasis

added).

^65. C. P. Snow, The Affair (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1960), 271-72.

^66. Albert Guérard, Fossils and Presences (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,

1957), 265.

^67. John Stuart Mill, “Notes of Recent Exposition,” Expository Times 70

(December 1958): 65.

^68. Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers X, 2.

^69. Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, 1:316.

^70. Ibid., 1:317.

^71. J. F. Dobson, Greek Orators (London:

Methuen, 1919), 53-57.

^72. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 1:156.

^73. Plato, Lesser Hippias 364B-365B.

^74. Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur, 1:1:131.

^75. Alfred N. Whitehead, quoted in Lucien Price, “To Live without Certitude,” Atlantic Monthly 193 (March 1954): 58; for

examples of this sublime confidence no

matter what, see James R. Newman,

“William Kingdom Clifford,” Scientific

American 183 (February 1953): 79.

^76. Albert W. Heere, in a letter to the editor, in American Institute of Biological Science

(AIBS) Bulletin (December 1960): 5.

^77. Karl Pearson, “The Knowledge of the Natural World,” Part B, in Troy W. Organ,

The Examined Life (Boston: Houghton

Mifflin, 1956): 118-19.

^78. Warren Weaver, “The Imperfections of Science,” American Scientist 49 (March 1961): 101.

^79. Hugh Nibley, “Victoriosa Loquacitas: The

Rise of Rhetoric and the Decline of Everything Else,” Western Speech 20 (Spring 1956): 57-58; reprinted in this volume, pages

243-45.

^80. Theodosius Dobzhansky, “The Present Evolution of Man,” Scientific American

(September 1960): 206; Sir Ronald Fisher,

“The Discontinuous Inheritance,” The

Listener (17 July 1958): 85, who notes that the concept “was an old fancy which had

been revived by the philosophers of the eighteenth century.” C. D. Darlington, “The

Natural History of Man,” The Listener (31

July 1958): 161, 165: “We are ready to

apply Darwin’s principles of natural selection and evolution . . . in understanding and

controlling the future.”

^81. Ernest Jones, “Nature of Genius,” Scientific Monthly 84 (February 1957): 82.

^82. D. M. S. Watson, “The Record of the Rocks,” The Listener (10 July 1958): 52; cf.

P. T. Matthews, The Nuclear Apple

(London: Chatto and Windus, 1971), 143.

^83. Ronald Good, “Natural Selection Re-

examined,” The Listener (7 May 1959): 797.

^84. Harry Grundfest, “Opinions on Darwin a Century After,” Science and Society 24

(1960): 153, attempts to prove natural

selection being “still largely unsuccessful,”

152.

^85. Von Otto H. Schindewolf,

“Neokatastrophismus,” Zeitschrift der

deutschen geologischen Gesellschaft 114

(1963): 430.

^86. William D. Thornbury, Principles of Geomorphology (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1954), 16.

^87. Nigel Calder, The Restless Earth: A Report on the New Geology (New York: Viking,

1972), 15.

^88. Diehls, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, frg.

73.

^89. Plato, Cratylus 402A; Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers IX, 9, 11; Aristotle, On the Soul I, 2, 405a; on the necessity of accepting fallible human

concensus as proof see Sextus Empiricus, Against the Logicians VII, 133.

^90. See the interpretation in Heinrich Ritter and Ludwig Preller, Historia Philosophiae

Graecae (Hildesheim: Gerstenberg, 1975), 25.

^91. Hippocrates, The Sacred Disease XXI, 1-4.

^92. Ibid., II, 1-10, 27-32.

^93. Hippocrates, The Art 2.

^94. Ibid., 3-6.

^95. Hippocrates, The Sacred Disease 21.

^96. J. B. S. Haldane, in Arnold Lunn and J. B.

S. Haldane, Science and the Supernatural

(New York: Sheed and Ward, 1935), 251.

^97. Sir Arthur Eddington, quoted in Joad, God and Evil, 111.

^98. Heere, AIBS Bulletin, 5.

^99. Geoffrey Bibby, “The Idea of Prehistory,” in Samuel Rapport and Helen Wright, eds.,

Archaeology (New York: New York

University Press, 1963), 18-20.

^100. John Rowland, “Science and Religion,”

Hibbert Journal 60/236 (1961/62): 5.

^101. M. G. Rutten, The Geological Aspects of the Origin of Life on Earth (New York: Elsevier, 1962), 2, 4. Cf. Rutten, The

Origin of Life by Natural Causes (New

York: Elsevier, 1971), 2.

^102. Francis Bacon, Novum Organum I, 59.

^103. Ibid., I, 64.

^104. George, Evolution in Outline, 16.

^105. Sir Joseph J. Thomson, Recollections and Reflections (New York: Macmillan, 1937), 160.

^106. Pearson, “The Knowledge of the Natural World,” 118.

^107. Koyré, From the Closed World, 274.

^108. Lucretius, De Rerum Natura V, 564.

^109. Ibid., V, 578.

^110. Ibid., V, 1194-95.

^111. Meletus, in Plato, Apology 26D.

^112. Charles N. Cochrane, Christianity and Classical Culture (New York: Oxford

University Press, 1944), 97; cf. Vitruvius,

On Architecture 8, on the Milesian school.

^113. Cicero, De Officiis II, 16, 56-57, and De

Haruspicum Responsis, 12.

^114. Hippocrates, The Sacred Disease II, 20-46.

^115. Ibid.

^116. Ibid.

^117. Chwolson, Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus, 2:469.

^118. Ibid., 2:41-46.

^119. Hippocrates, The Art 6.

^120. Hippocrates, Ancient Medicine 13-15.

^121. Hippocrates, The Sacred Disease 2.

^122. Chwolson, Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus, 2:470.

^123. Hippocrates, The Sacred Disease XXI, 25, 26.

^124. Peter T. Mora, “The Folly of Probability,”

in Sidney W. Fox, The Origins of

Prebiological Systems (New York:

Academic, 1965), 45 (emphasis added).

^125. Norman W. Pirie, “Some Assumptions Underlying Discussion on the Origins of

Life,” Annals New York Academy of

Sciences 69 (1957): 373.

^126. Julian Jaynes, “The Routes of Science,”

American Scientist 54 (March 1966): 95.

^127. Louis V. Pirsson and Charles Schuchert, Introductory Geology (New York: John

Wiley and Sons, 1920), 5-6.

^128. Marshall D. Sahlins, “The Origin of Society,” Scientific American 203

(September 1960): 77-78, 82.

^129. William W. Howells, “The Distribution of Man,” Scientific American 203 (September 1960): 114.

^130. Joad, God and Evil, 124-25.

^131. Ibid., 111.

^132. Sir Gavin de Beer, “Natural Selection after 100 Years,” The Listener (3 July 1958): 12.

^133. Sir Wilfrid LeGross Clark, “The Humanity of Man,” Advancement of Science 18

(September 1961): 218.

^134. A. Thoma, “Métissage ou transformation essai sur les hommes fossiles de Palestine,”

L’Anthropologie 62 (1958): 47.

^135. Calder, Mind of Man, 17-18.

^136. Dobson, Greek Orators, 9-10.

^137. Good, “Natural Selection,” 797.

^138. Hippocrates, The Art II, 6-11.

Part 2: Proposition 5 and

Proposition 6

Proposition 5. The Sophic claims (A)

all knowledge for its province, to the exclusion of all other claimants and the (B)

rejection of all other approaches. (C) It is as aggressive as it is negative, and (D) is filled with a crusading and reforming zeal.

A. Its province is all knowledge.

Modern Statements: “Theoretical

science is the attempt to uncover an ultimate

and comprehensive set of axioms (including

mathematical rules) from which all the

phenomena of the world could be shown to

follow by deductive steps.” 1 “The West has suffered from an excess of subjectizing the

world. When it does not know something, it denies its existence. . . . That which is not

seen has never existed. . . . The tactic of

suppressing that which is not known is

ancient indeed in the scientific petulance of

the West.” 2 “One thing that disturbs me is the idea that science can solve everything. . . .

What man chooses to do with the discoveries

of science and their applications is beyond

science.” 3

Ancient Statements: Aristotle’s great

scientific encyclopedia was handed down

through the generations as the compendium

of all knowledge, “diluted to the utmost and rendered as far as possible mechanical. ”4 As such it was effectively employed by the

Sophists. The Summas of the Scholastic philosophers assert the totality of their

knowledge: what is not in their book does

not exist.

B. At the same time it claims to be the only door to knowledge, all or partial.

Modern Statements: “No, our science

is no illusion. But an illusion it would be to suppose that what science cannot give us we

can get elsewhere.” 5 “Modern Science. . .

claims that the whole range of phenomena,

mental as well as physical—the entire

universe—is its field. It asserts that the

scientific method is the sole gateway to the whole region of knowledge. ”6 “The fundamental principle of science is that it

concerns itself exclusively with what can be

demonstrated, and does not allow itself to be

influenced by personal opinions or sayings

of anybody. This is why the motto of the Royal Society of London is Nullus in verba: we take no man’s word for anything.” 7

Ancient Statements: Aristotle’s

“analytical spirit . . . found its food in

positive science,” which is based on the “the Hellenistic pictures of the world, self-sufficient, emphasizing totality, . . . [though]

far removed from living research”—

research that was rendered unnecessary by

the all-embracing nature of the system; the

method was the answer, the medium was the

message. 8 It was the intention of the philosophers to supplant the poets as the

complete guides to knowledge. 9 “The Hellenistic systems . . . dogmatically

construct a fixed picture of the world out of

‘valid propositions,’ and in this safe shell

they seek refuge from the storms of life.” 10

C. The others are not only ignorant, they are thieves and pretenders: the Mantic must

be harried out of the land.

Modern Statements: The fallacies of

Scientism are that (1) “Science . . . alone is sufficient to lead us to truth.” (2) Science can

save us. (3) Objectivism: only the tangible and observable are real. (4) “Anything and

everything . . . can be understood best in

terms of its earlier and simpler stages.” (5) It has a contempt for history. (6) It “involves

such dogmas as determinism and relativism.”

(7) It “enhances the pernicious cult of

power.” 11 Thus the geologist of Richard McKenna’s “The Secret Place” proclaims, “I

am as positivistic a scientist as you will

find. . . . The students blush and hate me, but it is for their own good. Science is the only

safe game, and it’s safe only if it is kept

pure. ”12 “Science has not only progressively reduced the competence of philosophy, but it

has also attempted to suppress it altogether

and to replace it by its own claim to

universality.” 13 “The touchstone of science is the universal validity of its results for all

normally constituted and duly instructed minds. . . . The glitter of the great

metaphysical systems becomes dross when tried by this touchstone.” Science claims not

only exclusive right to the territory it has

occupied but also to any “territory that

science has not yet effectively occupied.” 14

“All other philosophy is sheer humbug. . . .

There can be no wisdom without the correct

worldview of our generation.” 15 “Do not be bullied by authoritative pronouncements

about what machines will never do. Such

statements are based upon pride.” 16 Is this claim that we can design machines that will

do anything at all an expression of great humility? “Whenever, therefore, we are

tempted to desert the scientific method of

seeking truth, whenever the silence of

science suggests that some other gateway

must be sought to knowledge, let us inquire

first whether the . . . problem . . . arise[s]

from a superstition,” etc. If not, then we must not look elsewhere, but must be patient and

await the scientific answer, even though we wait hundreds of years for it;17 patience is here the escape hatch.

Ancient Statements: Rabbi Eliezer

asks, “Who is worse—the one who says to

the king, ‘Either you or I will dwell in the

palace,’ or the one who says, ‘Neither you

nor I will dwell in the palace’?” The former

is far worse, and that is the position the

Sophic takes. Its justification is that of the man who had a wine cellar, “He opened one

barrel and found it sour, another and found it sour, and a third and found it sour.” And he

said,” ‘This satisfies me that all the barrels are unfit!’” Is he justified? 18 The purpose and practice of the Schools was to make it

possible formally and legally to ostracize all who did not share one’s point of view. This

is intolerance more characteristic of the

Sophically oriented West than of the

pluralistic and Mantic East; it is not

characteristic of religions in general, but of scientists and of religions which have

accommodated themselves to the Sophic

views of the time, such as the Schools of

Alexandria, Pumbadetha, Basra, and so

forth.19 The tyranny of the Schools needs no illustration for college students of any period of Western civilization! It is our Sophic

heritage.

D. Not content merely with its own

researches, the Sophic undertakes with

evangelical zeal to reform the follies of the Mantic.

“After the publication of the Origin of

Species a controversy arose in Europe and America. It was a struggle between the

Christian theological conception of man and

the conception held by science. . . . If you

were in this controversy, . . . you were either for religion or you were for science.” 20 “For Huxley . . . the battle against the doctrine of

inspiration, whether plenary or otherwise, was the crucial engagement in the fight for

evolution and for stopped freedom of

scientific inquiry.” 21 “In all parts of the world [evolution] has dealt a mortal blow to

the traditional and superstitious mythologies

with which men of all races have decorated

their ideas about human origins.” 22 “The most important responsibilities of the

geologists involve . . . [freeing] people from the myths of Biblical creation. Many

millions still live in mental bondage

controlled by ignorant ranters who accept the

Bible as the last word in science. ”23 “The failure of our people to take evolution

seriously can be traced to . . . our domination by antiquated religious traditions.” 24

Proposition 6. The Mantic has its own

peculiar (A) flaws and (B) advantages. In the long run it is preferable to the Sophic.

A. Since the Mantic makes allowance for the things beyond human control, it is less tightly bound by determinism than the

Sophic; Mantic thinking enjoys greater

flexibility and latitude, and this opens the

door to all kinds of quacks and pretenders. It is these who supply the Sophic with its

causa belli and its ammunition.

Modern Statements: Newton, though

firmly believing in God, could not accept the

denatured and abstract religious teachings of

his day, the result of centuries of eager

accommodation by religionists to the

prevailing science of their times. He turned

from a denatured Mantic tradition to a

straightforward literal understanding of the

Scriptures, which for him was completely

consistent with the literal and tangible nature of his scientifically constructed universe. 25

Like the Sophic, the Mantic practitioners

form schools which are even more

retrograde to the Mantic spirit than to the Sophic, since they define, control, reward,

and punish orthodoxy and heresy. The Mantic

is defective in two ways: through too much

control and too little. On the one hand, the

schoolmen rigidly define, reward, and

punish orthodoxy and heresy; on the other,

wild-eyed sectaries and individuals go to

completely irresponsible excesses. The

essence of the Mantic, as the Didache points out, is that it cannot be judged: who can tell when another is receiving inspiration or not?

Years of religious oppression and

suppression have given all religion a bad

name. The abuses of the Mantic are real, but

they are not the whole story.

Ancient Statements: It was as a reaction to the excesses of Orphism that “Greece . . .

enshrined the worldly wisdom of men who

stood wholly aloof from mystic excitements

and sought for no revelation, in the fiction of

the Seven Sages.” 26 There is evidence that Apollo and Athena were in early times the

sober and Sophic successors of the more

mystic religion of the Earth-goddess, though

their cults were also highly Mantic in nature,

“this new [method] of mantike [by] inspired prophets” supplanting the more “primitive”

divination of chthonian allure27 because of the abuses of the latter. The Sophic invasion

of the mid-fifth century was a further step in the same direction in the manner in which the

Darwinian cult became a religious follow-up

as it were of the Reformation; but

Darwinism went much further than the

preceding reformation and abolished the

whole religious tradition. 28 The schools took over aggressively and eagerly, completely

supplanting their Mantic predecessors, the

inspired poets who were “older . . . and

considered themselves much wiser.” 29

B. In spite of its susceptibility to

abuses, Mantic free-wheeling has the advantage of the Sophic, which necessarily

takes a posture of unshakeable integrity and

undeviating rightness, thus placing its

pretensions in a very vulnerable position.

Modern Statements: “The university is

based upon scrupulous honesty of thought;

and that honesty must expire at the portal of

the three sectarian chapels,” i.e., it is pure and cannot look upon faith with the least

degree of allowance. 30 This means that the flexible Mantic enjoys an advantage over the

brittle Sophic: “Computers usually work

with much greater accuracy than the human

brain but if any element in a computer

becomes faulty then catastrophic errors

occur. . . . In contrast to this . . . the brain does not break down completely and,

although much information processing is

done rather inaccurately, the result is almost never complete nonsense,” i.e., it is the

infallible Sophic machine and not the bungling Mantic imagination which runs the

greater risk. 31 “The [Sophic] idea that we can at will, and preparatory to scientific

discovery, purge our mind from prejudices . .

. is naive and mistaken. . . . The rule ‘purge yourself from prejudice’ can therefore have

only the dangerous result that, after having

made an attempt or two, you think you are now free from prejudices—which means, of

course, that you will stick only more

tenaciously to your unconscious prejudices

and dogmas.” 32

The posture of uprightness and perfect

integrity is an occupational necessity to the

Sophist, but it makes him very vulnerable

and therefore all the more touchy and

authoritarian. 33 Thus it insists upon such-and-such an explanation, for example, “that

the Darwinian mechanism is the only

possible one,” ignoring the fact that “the

number of competing theories is always infinite,” and thereby closing the door to the untrammeled explorations it advocates.34

The strength of the Mantic is that it not only leaves the door open, but is willing to look

behind the door; its open-mindedness is now

recommended to science: “Science is not a system of certain, or well-established

statements; nor is it a system which steadily

advances toward a state of finality. . . .

Every scientific statement must remain

tentative forever. . . . Science does not rest upon rock-bottom,” but “above a swamp.” 35

The unflinching scientific discipline that was the pride and boast of the Berlin school of

Classical and Oriental scholarship at the turn of the century not only deprived its

representative of the opportunity to make

great discoveries, but by its relentless

skepticism frequently led them into paths of

error, according to Eduard Meyer.36

Paradoxically, scientists often pay tribute to intuition, the one thing that strict objectivity will not allow. Thus Darwin in

the jungle: “No one can stand in these

solitudes unmoved, and not feel that there is

more in man than the mere breath of his

body. ”37 “The favorite child of Darwinism is blind chance,” but the amazing perfection

and complexity of biological processes now

rules this out: “If one will only let the

transcendent nature of every organic

phenomenon work upon him, one will then

discern the very opposite of anything like

chance.” 38 In science, “progress has only been possible by again and again returning to

the observation of the world as it is, by

stepping out of the laboratory and the

dissecting room (and I would add the study),

into the open air, forgetting for the time at

least the abstract methods, the images and

models, the selected and prepared specimens

of the scientific student.” 39 In theoretical physics “even a partial reversal of causal

relations means the substitution of the

question ‘What for?’ for the question ‘Why?’

. . . The question which begins a child’s

cognition of the world may also prove

legitimate in the exact sciences.” 40 Aside from intuition, man possesses a sensitivity of sight and hearing which far excels that of

scientific instruments, and which should be

trusted. 41

This recognition of the intuitive

embarrasses the Sophic. After announcing

that “the element of constructive invention,

of . . . intuition . . . remains the core of any mathematical achievement,” Richard Courant

and Herbert Robbins warn the student that

“for scientific procedure it is important to

discard elements of metaphysical character

and to consider observable facts always as

the ultimate source of notions and

constructions,” and thus reap the “reward for courageous adherence to the principle of

eliminating metaphysics.” 42 For always the idea is that “two different paths” lead to

knowledge. “The first, revelation, . . . is

closed to a great many people and

independent of rational thought. . . . The

second, on the contrary, is strictly rational

and scientific”—we cannot mix them.43 As a result, “scientific philosophy” is a

contradiction, “the invention of thinkers

devoid of any true philosophical gift or

vocation. . . . Intuition is the sine qua non of philosophy. . . . Philosophical intuition

cannot be deduced from anything else; it is

primary.” 44 “No scientist has the slightest idea what mass attraction is. . . . Though popularly unrealized . . . the origins of

science are inherently immersed in an a

priori mystery.” 45 “They try to ‘cover up’

their ignorance by asserting that no

fundamental mystery exists. . . . And the why-for and how-come . . . of all the known family of . . . generalized principles—thus

far discovered by scientific observation—. .

. are all and together Absolute mystery. . . .

Therefore in direct contradiction to present

specialization, all educational processes

must henceforth commence at the most

comprehensive level . . . that consists of the earnest attempt to embrace the whole

eternally regenerative phenomenon Scenario

Universe. And this is what children try to do

spontaneously [see Kozyrev above]. . . .

Perversely, the parents tell them to forget

[the] Universe and to concentrate with A, B,

C, 1, 2, and 3. . . . Human life contains the

weightless omnipowerful, omniknowing

metaphysical intellect which alone can

comprehend, sort out, select, integrate, co-

ordinate and cohere.” 46

Ancient Statements: The arrogance of

the Sophic over the Mantic, and the disastrous results of this hubris, is the

subject of much of the best Greek literature.

Since our schools are Sophic, this fact has

been completely over-looked where it has

not been actually covered up. Heraclitus,

Pindar, Plato, Aristophanes, Sophocles, and

Euripides are full of gibes at the conceit of

the know-it-all professors and of warnings

against their insidious teachings. 47

Aristophanes’ first play was a biting satire

on the Athenian youth and the new education

of “the skeptical purpose, and the insidious

sophistic” 48 that was making them what they were; “they were full of strange information,

and sometimes of shocking beliefs and

disbeliefs, which they had learnt from the

professional ‘sophists’ or men of learning. ”49

It was the Sophists who effected the

death of Socrates, accusing him of sacrilege and of leading the youth astray, the very

things of which they were guilty; and the schoolmen to this day love to represent

Socrates as going about barefoot in Athens

debunking not the Sophic intellectuals (which were his particular target) but the

Mantic traditions of the fathers—which he

always supported. “Socrates turned away

from Ionic Philosophy though his study of

natural science continued: he overcame the

skepticism and individualism of the

Sophists, but was himself transformed into

the [champion and] image of the free-

thinker,” so that “the dismantling

( Zersetzungsprozess) of religion” went on unimpeded—in his name. 50 For those philosophers who recognized the necessity

and importance of the Mantic, the intellectual quest did not end: for them philosophy is a

middle road, “the suspension between

ignorance and ‘wisdom.’” Aristotle did not

think of philosophy as the “totality of all

knowledge.” 51 It was all the same tradition, the Sophic itself being “a residue of the

dogmatic way of thinking” of the earlier

Mantic, 52 operating on a different level rather than the replacing of one authority by

another.53 Philosophy occupied for a while the middle ground. 54

C. Those whom the Sophic claims for

its greatest representatives lean strongly toward the Mantic, though the Sophic

proposition condemns any such concessions.

Modern Statements: Newton is a

shining example of this. Dr. Ernest Jones

commented, “Most of Newton’s biographers

have suppressed the important fact that

throughout his life theology was much more

important to him than science, and,

moreover, theology of a peculiarly arid and

bigoted order. ”55 The literalism of Newton’s religious beliefs, which did not concur with

the prevailing religious teachings of his time, shocks Dr. Jones as a scientist. As to

the all-sufficiency of matter, “That gravity

should be innate, inherent, and essential to

matter, so that one body may act upon

another at a distance through a vacuum . . . is to me so great an absurdity that I believe no

man who has in philosophical matters a

competent faculty of thinking can ever fall

into it.” 56 But Newton will not compromise:

“Newton’s God is not merely a

‘philosophical’ God, the impersonal and

uninterested First Cause of the Aristotelians, or the—for Newton—utterly indifferent and

world-absent God of Descartes. He is . . .

the Biblical God, the effective Master and

Ruler of the world created by him. ”57 Even his “‘principles of mathematical philosophy’

are . . . radically opposed to those of

materialism . . . and postulate—or

demonstrate—its [the world’s] production

by the purposeful action of a free and intelligent Being.” 58 “Newton explicitly recognized the challenge of the facts. . . . But he held that the explanation of this was a

problem for religion, not mathematical

philosophy,” so he writes: “This most

beautiful system of the sun, planets, and

comets, could only proceed from the counsel

and dominion of an intelligent and powerful

Being.” 59 He seems to be quoting the Pearl of Great Price in such passages: “Does it not

appear from Phaenomena that there is a Being incorporeal, living, intelligent,

omnipresent, who in infinite Space, as it

were in his Sensory, sees the things

themselves intimately, and thoroughly

perceives them, and comprehends them

wholly by their immediate presence to

himself. ”60

Newton thus becomes a highly

unorthodox outcast of both camps: of the

“spiritual” and abstract Mantic of his time, which did not derive faith from phenomena, and which still deplores the “cosmism” of

the Latter-day Saints; and of the hard-headed

scientists who insist that if you deal with

phenomena it is not permitted to go any

farther. 61 “Men will say at last that all philosophy ought to be founded in

atheism.” 62 “Mechanical hypotheses . . . lead straight away towards atheism, . . . deny

God’s action in the world and push him out

of it. It is indeed, practically certain . . . that the true and ultimate cause of gravity is the

action of the ‘spirit’ of God.” 63 Newton’s own disciples would not tolerate his

position; the very thing he took as proof of

God, the force of attraction, they promptly

converted into the opposite. But Newton

prophesied they would by a deep and

dangerous perversion of the very meaning

and aim of natural philosophy “at last sink

into the mire of that infamous herd who dream that all things are governed by fate

[chance] and not by providence. ”64 Newton is not alone: it has been shown that the basic

“prerequisite of genius” in science is on the

one hand a refusal to “acquiesce” to the

Sophic dogmas of the day, “imperviousness

to the opinions of others, notably of

authorities,” and on the other hand of “a

curious credulity” in Mantic matters.65

Descartes, with purely scientific interest

in view, “entered into direct contact with the intellectual atmosphere of the

Rosicrucians”66and believed that his world-shaking discovery in mathematics was given

to him in visions. 67 Some present-day scientists also lean to the Mantic: “Yes, the

triumphs of the physical scientists are

impressive enough to explain why science

has a great reputation. . . . But the mysteries of life—perhaps they are intended to remain

mysteries. ”68 “The inductive format of the scientific paper should be discarded, . . . and scientists should not be ashamed, . . . as

many of them apparently are ashamed to admit, that hypotheses . . . are imaginative

and inspirational in character. . . . They are indeed adventures of the mind.” 69 This actually precedes the inductive format.

“Hypotheses arise by guesswork. That is to

put it in its crudest form. I should say rather that they arise by inspiration.” 70 “The most beautiful thing we can experience is the

mysterious. ”71

Ancient Statements: Aristotle turned

away from “the metaphysical and conceptual

attitude of his early decades” to pure

science; but in his old age he turned back

again: “He justifies metaphysics now by

means of the everlasting longing of the

human heart.” 72 Aristotle’s first work was a

defense of the Mantic Homer against the Sophist critics.73 Both Plato and Aristotle in their old age turned with deepest devotion to

the teachings of Zoroaster. Neither lost his

scientific tendencies. Plato combined his

Socratic with the Eleatic science and

especially favored Pythagoras, in whom the

Mantic and Sophic combine in a remarkable

way. 74 Plato and his predecessors “transform an originally theological idea, the idea of explaining the visible world by a postulated invisible world, into the fundamental instrument of theoretical science. ”75 “By his adoption of geometry as the theory of the

world he provided Aristarchus, Newton, and

Einstein with their intellectual toolbox.” 76

Thus the Mantic Plato made solid scientific

contributions. He insisted that knowledge

came by inspiration, via anamnesis, as did

Pythagoras: “I do not teach myself anything, I only remember.” 77 Popper explains this

midway position between Mantic and Sophic as the “second-order tradition”

which welcomed the heritage of myth as the

foundation for new and fruitful discussion

and investigation, instead of condemning it.78

The Poet is exalted up to the point where he

becomes another Pythian, whose ravings are

unintelligible to himself. “He is relegated to an adyton, and between him and the public

the Philosopher keeps guard, who alone can

understand and interpret him,” 79 according to a recent interpretation which places

philosophy squarely between the Mantic and

the public.

The original line of inspiration is lost in

the mists of time, and may, as among the

Ancient Semites, have gone back “to the

shācir, the Knower, the possessor of

supernatural knowledge. He passed as a kind

of oracle for his tribe, as did the kāhin. . . .

His capacity was attributed to a special

spirit (jinn, or in Greek, daimōn).” 80 Plato, like Newton, insisted that the ultimate mover

was a divine spirit, Aristotle an entelecheia; Pythagoras and Philoslaeus harmonia, and Xenocrates number. 81 These thinkers seem to combine Sophic and Mantic, yet any

concession whatever to the Mantic

disqualifies them in this Sophic camp. Cato,

who “rejected the findings of Greek

philosophy in order to fall back upon a

shrewd peasant wisdom,” 82 combines a much lower order of Sophic and Mantic.

Sextus Empiricus is another who turns

against the Sophic, but in a “puerile and

pedantic” way, attacking its good (especially

its good) as well as its bad side. 83 While the students at Socrates’ school went deeply into

experimental science, to the amusement of

the more practically minded Athenians, “they

were [at the same time] much occupied with

religion and the after life.” So they offended

both the learned Sophist and the superstitious man in the street. 84 “It is your neglect of geometry,” Socrates tells the businessman

Callicles, “which convinces you that you

should strive for a bigger share of things than other men possess” ;85 for business rejects both the egghead Sophic and the impractical

Mantic.

“When I was young,” says Socrates, “I

was fanatically devoted to the intellectual

quest which they call physical research. . . . I was convinced that no one need look any

farther than science for the answers to

everything.” 86 Plato confesses the same weakness and goes on to relate how he was

converted, not away from the study of

physical science, but to seeing in physical

science, as Newton did, the workings of a

divine and directing mind. 87 At the end of the Sophist, Plato defines a Sophist as one who treats all traditions and beliefs as strictly

human productions. For him this will not do; there was more behind it than that. The great

men of old—poets, diviners, statesmen, and

prophets—prove their inspiration “when

they say much that is true without knowing

what they say. ”88 “Poetry is really a thing divine and holy. . . . Its votaries (as Plato

would say) are in a state of fine phrenzy.” 89

“I know that they do what they do not by any

intelligence of their own, but by a special

nature, an inspiration such as holy prophets

and oracles have, for they too speak many

fine and wonderful things without knowing

what they are saying.” 90 The only fit instruction for the youth are the words of

men “inspired from heaven.” 91

Socrates explains his course of life

against the Sophists: “Because, as I said, the way was shown to me by God, by oracles

and dreams and by whatever other means

divine providence directs the actions of

men.” 92 “Listen to a tale which you consider a myth,” he says to a gathering of Sophist

teachers, “but which I believe to be true. . . .

In a word, whatever characteristics a man’s

body presented in life, these remain visible

in death. . . . But you, . . . the wisest of all the Greeks of our day, can’t demonstrate the

necessity of living any other life than this

one. ”93 It is a direct confrontation of Sophic and Mantic, and in the end cost Socrates his

life. In the same spirit, modern professors,

offended by the Mantic emphasis of Plato’s

Ion, deny its authenticity. It must not be förgötten that the University never förgöt that it was a Musaeon, a temple of the Muses,

who gave divine inspiration to men.

Notes to Part 2

Footnotes

^1. Jacob Bronowski, “The Logic of the Mind,”

American Scientist 54 (March 1966): 4; cf.

Julian Jaynes, “The Routes of Science,”

American Scientist 54 (March 1966): 95.

^2. Luís A. Sánchez, quoted in Carleton Beals, Nomads and Empire Builders (New York:

Chilton, 1961), 64.

^3. Detlev W. Bronk, quoted in Vance Packard, The Waste Makers (New York: David

McKay, 1960), 318.

^4. Werner Jaeger, Aristotle, tr. Richard Robinson (Oxford: Clarendon, 1948), 335.

^5. Sigmund Freud, The Future of an Illusion, tr.

and ed. James Strachey (New York: Norton,

1961), 56. This concluding sentence was

once required reading for all freshman at the

University of California.

^6. Karl Pearson, “The Knowledge of the Natural World,” Part B, in Troy W. Organ, The

Examined Life (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1956): 120.

^7. Sir Gavin de Beer, “Natural Selection after

100 Years,” The Listener (3 July 1958): 12

(emphasis added). Cf. John Wild, “The

Exploration of the Life-World,” Proceedings and Addresses of the American

Philosophical Association 34 (October

1961): 18, on science as the only truth.

^8. Jaeger, Aristotle, 373-74 (emphasis added).

^9. Dio Chrysostom, Discourse XII, 57-58.

^10. Jaeger, Aristotle, 376.

^11. Arthur W. Munk, “Philosophy, Science and Man’s Plight,” Pacific Philosophy Forum 6

(September 1967): 13-16.

^12. Richard McKenna, “The Secret Place,” in The Nebula Award Stories: Number Two

(Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1967), 15.

^13. Nicolas Berdyaev, Solitude and Society (London: Centenary, 1938), 12.

^14. Pearson, “The Knowledge of the Natural World,” 120. Cf. Francis Bacon, Novum

Organum I, 54.

^15. Rudolf Jordan, The New Perspective (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1951), 171.

^16. Marvin Minsky, “Machines Are More Than They Seem,” Science Journal 4 (October 1968): 3.

^17. Pearson, “The Knowledge of the Natural World,” 119.

^18. Midrash Genesis Rabbah (Noach) 38:6.

^19. Hugh Nibley, “How to Have a Quiet Campus, Antique Style,” BYU Studies 9

(Summer 1969): 448-50; reprinted in this

volume, pages 297-99.

^20. Leslie A. White, “Evolutionism in Cultural Anthropology: A Rejoinder,” The American

Anthropologist 49 (July-September 1947): 402.

^21. John C. Greene, “Darwin and Religion,”

Proceedings of the American Philosophical

Society 103 (1959): 717.

^22. Sir Ronald Fisher, “The Discontinuous Inheritance,” The Listener (17th July 1958): 85.

^23. Dorsey Hager, “Fifty Years of Progress in Geology: The Presidential Address to the

Utah Geological Society,” Geotimes 2

(August 1957): 12.

^24. Hermann J. Müller, “One Hundred Years without Darwinism Are Enough,” The

Humanist 19 (June 1959): 139-40.

^25. Ernest Jones, “Nature of Genius,” Scientific Monthly 84 (February 1957): 81.

^26. J. B. Bury and Russell Meiggs, A History of Greece to the Death of Alexander the Great, 4th ed. (New York: St. Martin’s, 1975): 199.

^27. Erwin Rohde, Psyche: The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks, tr.

W. B. Hillis, 2 vols. (New York: Harper

Torchbooks, 1966), 2:290.

^28. Theodor Hopfner, Orient und griechische Philosophie (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1925), 64-65.

^29. Dio Chrysostom, Discourse XII, 57.

^30. Albert Guérard, Fossils and Presences (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,

1957), 266.

^31. N. S. Sutherland, “Machines Like Men,”

Science Journal 4 (October 1968): 47.

^32. Karl R. Popper, “Science: Problems, Aims,

Responsibilities,” Federation Proceedings of the American Societies for Experimental

Biology 22 (1963): 962 (emphasis added).

^33. Ibid., 963-64.

^34. Ibid., 964, 970.

^35. Karl R. Popper, quoted in Warren Weaver,

“The Imperfections of Science,” American

Scientist 49 (March 1961): 112.

^36. Eduard Meyer, “Die Bedeutung der Erschliessung des alten Orients für die

geschichtliche Methode und für die Anfänge

der menschlichen Geschichte Überhaupt,”

Sitzungsberichte der berlinischen Akademie 25 (1908): 648-52.

^37. Charles Darwin, quoted in Max Rosenberg, Introduction to Philosophy (New York:

Philosophical Library, 1955), 286.

^38. Heinrich Schirmbeck, “Evolution und Freiheit,” Merkur 14 (June 1960): 523.

^39. J. T. Merz, Religion and Science, A Philosophical Essay (Edinburgh:

Blackwood and Sons, 1915); 103, quoted in

A. P. Elkin, “A Darwin Centenary and

Highlights of Field-Work in Australia,”

Mankind 5 (November 1959): 333.

^40. Nikolai Kozyrev, “An Unexplored World,”

Soviet Life (November 1965): 45, in which the foremost Russian astrophysicist rejects

the finality of entropy.

^41. “Man Superior to Machine,” Science Newsletter 71 (12 January 1957): 22.

^42. Richard Courant and Herbert Robbins, What Is Mathematics? (New York: Oxford

University Press, 1941): xvii-xviii.

^43. Pierre L. du Noüy, Human Destiny (New York: Longmans, Green, 1947), 3.

^44. Berdyaev, Solitude and Society, 15-17.

^45. R. Buckminster Fuller, Intuition (Garden City, NY: Double-day, 1972), 39.

^46. Ibid., 41, 42, 46, 70.

^47. Plato, Gorgias 527B; and Pindar, Olympian Odes II, 91-97, are two examples.

^48. George Saintsbury, A History of Criticism and Literary Taste in Europe, 3 vols.

(London: William Blackwood and Sons,

1949), 1:22.

^49. Gilbert Murray, Aristophanes (London: Oxford University Press, 1933), 20;

Saintsbury, A History of Criticism, 1:22-23.

^50. Wilhelm Nestle, Vom Mythos zum Logos (Stuttgart: Scientia Verlag Aalen, 1966), 539.

^51. Jaeger, Aristotle, 402.

^52. Karl R. Popper, Conjectures and Refutations (New York: Basic Books, 1962), 51.

^53. Ibid., 12-15, 49-51.

^54. Herwig Maehler, “Review of E. N.

Tigerstedt’s Plato’s Ideas of Poetical

Inspiration,” Gnomon 44 (November

1972): 645.

^55. Jones, “Nature of Genius,” 81.

^56. Isaac Newton, quoted in Alexandre Koyré, From the Closed World to the Infinite

Universe (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Press, 1957), 178-79.

^57. Ibid., 225.

^58. Ibid., 241.

^59. Lancelot L. Whyte, Accent on Form (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1954), 71-72.

^60. Newton, quoted in Koyré, From the Closed

World, 208-9 (emphasis added).

^61. Edwin A. Burtt, The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science

(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1950),

282-84.

^62. George Berkeley, quoted in Koyré, From the Closed World, 233.

^63. Newton’s conclusion of his General Scholium; Koyré, From the Closed World, 234.

^64. Koyré, From the Closed World, 232.

^65. Jones, “Nature of Genius,” 80.

^66. Jacques Maritain, The Dream of Descartes, tr. Mabelle L. Andison (New York:

Philosophical Library, 1944): 18.

^67. Ibid., 19-23. Cf. Carl Sagan, The Cosmic Connection (New York: Doubleday, 1973), 103-4, and I. Bernard Cohen, Revolution in Science (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1985), 131-32.

^68. Weaver, “The Imperfections,” 100.

^69. P. B. Medawar, “Is the Scientific Paper Fraudulent?” Journal of Human Relations

13 (1965): 6.

^70. Ibid., 5.

^71. Albert Einstein, quoted in James T. Adams et al., Living Philosophies (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1931), 6.

^72. Jaeger, Aristotle, 337, 339.

^73. Wilhelm Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur (Munich: Beck,

1940), 1:1:131; Aristotle, Poetics 25.

^74. Nestle, Vom Mythos zum Logos, 540-42.

^75. Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, 89.

^76. Ibid., 92.

^77. Lucian, Biōn Prāsis (Philosopher’s Auction) 3.

^78. Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, 126-27.

^79. E. N. Tigerstedt, quoted in Maehler,

“Review of E. N. Tigerstedt,” 645

(emphasis added).

^80. Carl Brockelmann, Geschichte der arabischen Literatur (Leipzig: Amelang, 1901), 1:12.

^81. Macrobius, Saturnalia I, 14, 19.

^82. Charles N. Cochrane, Christianity and Classical Culture (New York: Oxford

University Press, 1944), 32.

^83. John E. Sandys, A History of Classical Scholarship, 3 vols. (New York:Hafner, 1958), 1:330.

^84. Murray, Aristophanes, 93.

^85. Plato, Gorgias 508.

^86. Plato, Phaedo 96A.

^87. Ibid., 97C.

^88. Plato, Meno 99D.

^89. Psellus, cited in Sandys, A History of Classical Scholarship, 1:389.

^90. Plato, Apology 22C.

^91. Plato, Laws VII, 809B-11E; Plato, Republic III, 394A-395E.

^92. Plato, Apology 33C.

^93. Plato, Gorgias 524, 527.

Part 3: Proposition 7 and

Proposition 8

Proposition 7. The hostility of the two camps is heightened if anything by a constant

going and coming between them, as pious youth desert to the Sophic and aging

scientists return to the bosom of the Mantic.

The mingling of the two factions is more like

a melee than fraternization, with each party

trying to capture the banner of the other.

A. The claims of the Mantic cannot be

ignored or abolished.

Modern Statements: The antagonism

between Religion and Science “has its roots

deep down in the diverse habits of thought of

different orders of mind. . . . [An unceasing]

battle of opinion . . . which has been carried on throughout all ages under the banners of

Religion and Science, has of course

generated an animosity fatal to a just

estimate of either party by the other”—but

they are both here to stay. 1 “Revelation, which is the basis of religion, is not itself

opposed to knowledge. On the contrary, . . .

revelation is what is revealed to me and knowledge is what I discover for myself.

How could there be any conflict between

what I discover cognitively and what is

demonstrated to me by religion?” The

trouble is caused when “Divine Revelation .

. . becomes adulterated by the immediate

reactions of the human community in which it

takes place, and by the way in which men

make use of it to further their own interests. .

. . Why should one refuse to submit to

religion if one is content to submit to

science?” 2 We can never escape the Mantic:

“All science is cosmology. . . . Both philosophy and science lose all their

attraction when they give up that pursuit. . . .

Western science . . . did not start with

collecting observations of oranges, but with

bold theories about the world.” 3 “The final ends of metaphysics and of human reason as

a whole are the three great themes of God,

freedom, and immortality”—which can

hardly escape the Mantic.4

Scientists today are constantly

glimpsing areas in which experience goes

beyond the Sophic. When they do so, they

immediately recoil and apologize. Thus, Nigel Calder repeatedly points out that the

relationship of thought to the brain “may be a question of ultimate cause as refractory as

asking why the universe exists. But that is no reason for doubting the reality of

consciousness, as a characteristic of living

brain tissue as rich as ours.” 5 In other words,

just because we can never prove that the matter of the brain produces thought is no

reason for doubting that it does! When

theologians use that argument they are

laughed to scorn. Again, “chemistry . . . may

sometimes overwhelm the mind, but the mind

can also dominate chemistry”—in that case,

who is the winner? Chemistry, of course:

“Both processes testify to the essentially

physical nature of the mind”—but why not to the essentially spiritual nature of it, since it dominates matter? 6 Thus the dice are always loaded in favor of the mechanism, but the

dice keep falling oddly. Though “‘the

ultimate in criteria of credibility . . . is

scientific objectivity,’ careful thinkers have long been skeptical about the supposed

objectivity of so-called scientific facts. ”7 So an anthropologist confesses that he reaches

his conclusions “on a purely subjective

basis, . . . one step removed from [intuition].

. . . Is this good enough? If it is not, what other method is available?” 8

Ancient Statements: As we have seen,

both Plato and Socrates in their youth went

over from Mantic to Sophic, and later

reversed themselves; it was not

accommodation but conversion. Since

ancient society was sacral, its existence

without the Mantic was simply unthinkable.

One could not destroy the Mantic element

without destroying the society. This is

exactly what happened, according to

Thucydides, who, though he does not believe

the oracles himself, notes that disaster

follows upon their neglect. That is why the

smart-alec teachings of the Sophists with

their popular science were viewed not with

the indifference and contempt they deserved

on their own merits, but with horror and

alarm by the greatest Greek thinkers. 9 Plato often comments on the ruinous trend of

Sophic teaching; he attributes to Pericles’

learning from the physicist Anaxagoras “to

despise all the superstitious fears” (the signs in the heavens), 10 the attitude that laid the foundation for the ruin of Athens. 11

B. The Sophic attempts to take over the religious prestige and prerogatives of the Mantic, both as being (1) a religion in its own right, and (2) as a countermeasure to fight fire with fire and deprive the Mantic of its unique advantages.

Modern Statements: (1) “Man . . .

appears to be not so much a rational animal

as an ideological animal. The history of

science, . . . especially since Francis Bacon, may be taken as an illustration. It was a

religious or semi-religious movement, and

Bacon was the prophet of the secularized

religion of science. He replaced the name

‘God’ by the name ‘Nature’; but almost

everything else he left unchanged. Theology,

the science of God, was replaced by the science of Nature; the laws of God were

replaced by the laws of Nature; God’s

power was replaced by the forces of Nature;

. . . God’s . . . omniscience . . . by the . . .

virtual omniscience of natural science.” 12

“Perhaps we should turn the world over to

this superbreed. . . . Perhaps they should

design not only the churches, but the creeds

also. . . . The sad fact is that some scientists themselves appear to believe precisely

this. ”13 Anthropologist Edmund R. Leach believes this and feels now is the time to

begin: “All the marvels of creation are seen

to be mechanisms rather than mysteries. . . .

All that remains of the divine will is the

moral consciousness of man himself. So we

must now learn to play God in a moral as

well as in a creative or destructive sense.” 14

Wallace Fenn makes an even more

impassioned plea: “It may be that there is no

meaning to life. . . . Even so, here we are, and we had better find some meaning or

invent one for ourselves so that we have

some definite mission to lend dignity to our

life. If there is a meaning, it obviously lies somewhere in the vast areas of biology

which are still unknown to us, and we should

have faith that it is at least worth looking for by the usual rational experimental approach.

. . . Unlike the physical sciences biology can be almost a religion in itself.” 15 Note the use of “faith” and rational experimental

approach in the same sentence. “Dr. Huxley .

. . [had] no serious intention of disguising the theological character of his writing, for his

account of Evolution is openly presented as

the theology of his own ‘Religion without

Revelation.’ . . . Evolution, then, takes on for Dr. Huxley most of the jobs of the

discredited Deity. . . . God has failed: we

must therefore put our trust in Evolution.” 16

Attempts have even been made to wed conventional religion and the religion of

science, as when the American Association

for the Advancement of Science “turned

amateur theologians and tried to prove that

science and religion are essentially in

harmony—that even St. Thomas was an

evolutionist. In order to make this

reconciliation possible, both science and

religion were emasculated of definite

meaning. ”17

(2) It was necessary to don the robes

and the aura of religion in order to deprive

the opposition of its advantage; some put

forth the doctrine that science was not an

enemy of religion but an improvement on it,

a great forward step. Science itself was a

higher and nobler religion. This fighting of

fire with fire begot a missionary zeal in such scientists as Huxley, Simpson, Römer, and

Shapley, who preached throughout the land

with evangelical fervor. “Here we see how modern science is providing what religious

beliefs have always sought, a coherent set of

beliefs about the universe and man. ”18

“There are still individual scientists [who] .

. . think of it [science] as a cult, a cult united by a mystique called ‘the scientific method,’

. . . a kind of pure virginal objectivity that has to guard its beauty against the wrinkled

advances of religion, art, or ethics.” 19

“Religion has emerged into human

experience mixed with the crudest fancies of

barbaric imagination. Gradually, slowly,

steadily the vision recurs in history under

nobler form and with clearer expression. ”20

“Man’s evolution is far more extraordinary

than the first chapter of Genesis used to lead people to suppose. . . . The story of man is

far more wonderful than the wonders of

physical science”—but the Sophic must be

allowed to tell it. 21 “It’s gratifying—or

should be gratifying to you—to be a part of this magnificent evolutionary show, even

though we must admit ourselves to be lineal

descendants of some rather nauseating gases

and sundry streaks of lightning.” 22

“Therefore from a very long range point of

view biological research becomes the

highest objective that can be thought of for

human life. In this respect the biologists

deserve front seats in the halls of learning

and the mission of AIBS [the American

Institute of Biological Science] becomes

closely identified with the mission of

mankind.” 23 “Evolution now becomes not only the Source of Comfort and Reassurance.

. . . It figures also as the Immanent and

Omnipresent Creator, . . . . whose Agent it is man’s privilege to be. . . . All the wonders

which for Archdeacon Paley were evidences

for the existence of God can on this view be

put to the credit of Evolution.” 24

Missionary zeal is apparent in Dorcey Hager’s presidential address before the Utah

Geological Society. “The most important

responsibilities of the geologists involve

effects of their findings on the mental

bondage controlled by ignorant ranters who

accept the Bible as the last word in

Science.” 25 The heathen must be saved. For the scientist " Proving—probing—all things is the privilege of ardent faith, the freedom

that belongs to the children of light.” 26 So the Sophic practitioners who pour scorn on the

Mantic as “True Believers” speak in the

pious language of the sectaries of the desert, in the end putting themselves forward as the

Children of Light. In reference to Arnold

Toynbee’s Study of History, hugh Trevor-Roper writes, “In the tenth volume of his

work, . . . his Book of Revelation, the secret is laid bare: the Messiah steps forth: he is

Toynbee himself. . . . All creation has been

groaning and travailing to produce him. ”27

“Bacon’s naive view . . . became the main

dogma of the new religion of science, . . .

and it is only in recent years that some

scientists have become willing to listen to

those who criticize this still powerful

dogma.” 28 “Dr. Huxley himself calls it ‘a glorious paradox’ that ‘this purposeless

mechanism, after a thousand million years of

its blind and automatic operations, has

finally generated purpose’”—and produced

Dr. Huxley. 29 Note the theological language

—a glorious paradox. Science fiction often

adopts the language and imagery of

apocalyptic (biblical) writings, as at the end of When Worlds Collide, when “the League of the Last Days,” made up of the world’s

top scientists, ushers in the Millennium.

“They shouted, sang. They laughed and

danced. The first day on the new earth had

begun.” 30 There are very few of the more

grandiose ideas and titles in science fiction which cannot be traced to the Bible. The

attitude is strongly authoritarian: “The public has become willing to accept, with the

respect accorded scientific conclusions, the

scientist’s view on numerous topics that have

nothing to do with his special area of

competence, or with science as a whole”—

as a scientist he becomes an authority on

everything. 31 With the Scientific revolution

“pride of physical place was replaced by

autodeification in the order of knowing. . . .

The Scientific revolution, . . . by denying the relevance, if not the possibility, of non-empirical, non-instrumental knowledge, . . .

made man the intellectual summit of the

universe,” 32 the only prophet, seer, and revelator.

Ancient Statements: The scholar

Longinus “is himself the Great Sublime he

draws!” The scholars, moving in on a sick

Mantic, took over religious teaching, and in the process destroyed it.

The grossness, luxury, and immorality of

pagan priests of the official state religion

were as predictable as that of the monks of

the late Middle Ages: they were smooth,

hypocritical, and greedy. 33 Conditions in Athens at the time the Sophist teachers took

over have been described in the tenth chapter

of Gilbert Murray’s book Aristophanes.

“Religion had become a service club. 34

Religion had declined: “Let fools talk about

justice or religion; the one solid good is to

have power and money.” 35 Poetry itself had become “an old harlot who has passed her

prime” but who pretends to be

ultrarespectable and proper; the official

morality cannot endure criticism or satire.36

Everywhere the scholars supplanted the

poets, to whom, as critics, they felt superior.

The Sophists pretended to be teaching a

higher form of religion, but their own greatness was the first and last article of

faith. Thus an orator would end a speech

with a perfectly irrelevant prayer, “abruptly

and grotesquely with an invocation to ‘Earth

and Sun and Virtue and Intelligence and

Education, through which we distinguish

between the noble and the base,’” 37 retaining a Mantic tone by clumsy contrivance. The

Sophic teachers were constantly on tour,

lecturing in many cities and on every subject, imitating the fabulous Seven Wise men of

old, and cultivating an aura of supernatural

wisdom which gave them the status of holy

men. 38 The business goes back to Sumerian times in the Orient. 39 The Jewish Scholars side by side with the Greek moved

constantly from city to city, acquiring great

fame and reputations for wisdom and

holiness. The system survived into Moslem

times40 and was carried over into medieval

Europe directly from the Sophist schools.

The world was the Sophist’ oyster as he

proclaimed his Sovereign immunity from all

restraints wherever he went; as a super-

thinker nothing could restrain him: he is

indeed none other than the true King. Of the

famous Proclus, president of the University

of Athens for forty-seven years, it is said that

“his pupils deemed him divinely inspired,”

and one visitor to his lectures saw a light

around his head.41 He preached that all religions were true, thus rendering all

devoid of any particular appeal. 42

When the Flavian emperors sponsored a

syncretium of the major religions in the cult

of Serapis, they met head-on resistance from

the Philosophers—the Stoics and Cynics. 43

Yet these very philosophers would unite all

religions in the bonds of allegory, and it was the “Stoic allegorizing which finally

dispelled all belief in the gods.” 44

“Protagoras’s ethics and politics are basically atheistic, even though . . . his ethics taught eusebia [piety] and moral order established by the unknown gods. ”45 The futility of his teaching was his vanity; his

celebrated dictum made man and no one else

“the measure of all things.” The Doctors

wanted all to be saved—but only if they did

the saving. Lucretius cannot abide the thought of ignorant multitudes in thrall to ancient

superstitions while he has the one saving

truth— “O miseras hominum mentes, et

pectora caeca!” —he is full of missionary fervor and, like any prophet, sees himself

borne victorious in glory to the skies. The

rhetorical art of the Sophists was devised as

a flexible tool to permit their mental and

spiritual domination in any field, 46 while retaining the appearance of the strictest

scientific detachment and accuracy; this was

possible by the use of doxa, the art of

cultivating appearances. Correcting the thought and diction of the ancients, their

subtle scholasticism dazzled and conquered:

their method and authority carried right over

into the Scholasticism of the Middle Ages.

The Arabs inherited the same tradition:

Bukhārī begins his work on cosmology by

announcing that the beginning of wisdom is

that there is no God but God and that the

scholars (scientists, culamā’) are the heirs and successors of the Prophets, and that they

have passed all knowledge from hand to

hand in a state of complete and perfect

preservation. God will smooth the way to

Paradise for those who follow them! This is

modest compared with the self-glorification

of the Doctors of the Talmud. The

Muctazilites are the purest of Sophic

teachers, always laying down rules about

what God may and what he may not do, like

the Scholastic Philosophers of Europe.47

There was a constant game of dominant and submissive going-on between the

ignorant public (which these men always

affected to despise) and the traveling wise

men, who appear either as martyrs or

masters of the mob. The Sophic contempt of

the ignorant was a permanent heritage of the

schools. 48 Francis Bacon noted the futility of the Ancient Schoolmen: “Now the wisdom

of the Greeks was professional and much

given to disputation, a kind of wisdom most

adverse to the inquisition of truth. . . .

[Pompously professional,] they are prompt

to prattle, but cannot produce; for their

wisdom abounds in words but is barren of

works.” 49 But is the Modern Sophic immune to such folly? “Much of the anthropological

writing of the time [the 1920s and 1930s]

was an attempt to show that the other fellow

thought wrongly. ”50 In the case of human footprints in very ancient rocks, if the

evidence is reliable, “then the whole science of geology is so completely wrong that all

geologists will resign their jobs and take up

truck driving. Hence . . . science rejects the attractive explanation.” In other words, any

evidence is rejected if it threatens our

careers!51 “Today’s ideological conflicts are carried . . . deeper and deeper into the study of [ancient] mankind.” 52

C. In the end, the Sophic produces an

army of Fakirs that surpasses the best efforts of the corrupted Mantic in its antics and its

arrogance.

Modern Statements: Compared to the

novelist, the image of the scientist in the

public mind (as revealed by an extensive

survey) is that of a uniquely intelligent,

manly, valuable, hard-working, and

dependable (albeit dull) individual.53 In biology, thanks to Darwin, science “gives the

false impression that we know much more about the origin of life than we actually

do.” 54 Furthermore, we have been brought to believe that scientists in general “thrive on

the replacement of their old and cherished

theories or beliefs by new ones” when, in

reality, it is against their natures to

“welcome with joy and satisfaction the

publication of a new theory, explanation, or .

. . scheme that would completely replace and

render superfluous [their] own creation.”

The history of science can therefore be

viewed “as a series of changing

‘orthodoxies’” in which scientists exhibit “a

certain measure of hostility to major

innovations.” 55 Bernard Cohen considers

“any suggestion that scientists so dearly love truth that they have not the slightest hesitation in jettisoning their beliefs is a mean

perversion of the facts. It is a form of

scientific idolatry, supposing that scientists

are entirely free from the passions that direct men’s actions.” 56

Since the mid-1960s scientists in

various fields have engaged in controversy

regarding the true nature of the Orgueil

meteorite (a “carbonaceous chondrite”); this

debate, writes Walter Sullivan, “is a classic

example of a scientific discussion become

personal, emotional and enmeshed with

professional pride. The talents and ingenuity

of participants have been directed toward

proving their case, rather than seeking out the truth. They have thus demonstrated that they

are human, but the wonderful self-discipline

and objectivity that we all call pure science

has suffered. The inconclusiveness of the

discussion also reflects the inadequacy of

our analytic methods. The Orgueil meteorite

has probably been more elaborately studied

than any other chunk of material on earth. Yet

. . . the complex and varied components of

this specimen defy precise definition.” 57

“So far are they [science majors] from

having learned any humility, they are known

in every high school and . . . college as the

most insufferable, cocksure knowit-alls. . . .

[They are] entitled to pour scorn on other

subjects from a very great height. ”58 “When the Piltdown hoax was exposed at the

meeting of the Geological Society of London

in November 1953, it precipitated a violent

discussion. . . . The meeting soon broke up

into a series of fist fights . . . [and] the fracas resulted in the expulsion of several members

of the dignified scientific body.” 59 When many valid objections to the evolutionary

hypothesis were brought forth by “people

who were not trained biologists . . . their

objections could be countered summarily on

grounds of ignorance, despite the fact that

Darwin’s hypothesis appealed so largely to

the evidence of common observation and

experience.” Many were deluded into thinking that because Darwin recognized the

objections, “in this way he had disposed of

them.” 60 “It is false that any reputable anthropologist nowadays professes an anti-evolutionist philosophy.” 61 Pure snobbery has cost the Sophic many a great discovery,

but without it the Sophic as such would not

survive. “It seems at times as if many of our

modern writers on evolution have had their

views by some sort of revelation. . . . Much

of what we learn today are only half truths or less. . . . An incorrect view can . . .

successfully displace the correct view for

many years. . . . Most students become

acquainted with many of the current concepts

in biology whilst . . . at an age when most

people are, on the whole, uncritical. . . . In addition, . . . most students tend to have the same sort of educational background and so

in conversation and discussion they accept

common fallacies and agree on matters based on these fallacies. ”62 “Aleš Hrdlička, the fanatic tzar holding to this [the Alaska-bridge] theory, smote down anybody

suggesting other possibilities.” 63 But “as long as this [knowledge] is assumed,

insufficient effort will be put into the attempt to find ways to obtain genuine evidence. ”64

Ancient Statements: “Tear yourself

away from the solemn conventions of these

self-styled philosophers, who do not agree

among themselves and who announce a

doctrine as the truth the moment it pops into

their heads. They are full of mutual hatred

and jealousy and ambition. ”65 They only close ranks against the ignorant public,

which they despise and neglect.66 Even the naked philosophers of Egypt and India were

jealous among themselves,67 and included Apollonius in their rivalries. In Coptic

Egypt, holy men traveled around collecting blessings from each other like the Sophists

before them. 68 In the fifth century “these defenders of a dying cause could at least

keep up the appearance of success by mutual

praise and admiration.” 69 Vanity and ineptitude were concealed behind altruistic

educational programs for improving other

people’s minds. “What good does it do you

to pay high salaries to teachers and raise up

a host of experts when the actions of our

society speak so much more loudly than their

safe, conventional commonplaces? For

philosophy of the mind ( psychē) is as much harder than text-book education as doing is

than talking. Should we teach more

philosophy? That is the very thing that has

brought us to this condition by destroying all ultimate certainty. ”70 Every scientist claims that he has the answer, overcome by his own

line of reasoning ( logos), quite aside from

the evidence itself. They are always knocking each other down: each one clings

to his own theories, and so complete disunity

reigns, according to Hippocrates, who is

good enough to point out that the only real

science is his science, 71 and that no amateur may be tolerated in that.72 In Syria the scholar Ephraim became the number-one

man by systematically attacking and finally

wiping out all the works of a far greater man, Bardasenes. “Everything has been done to

obscure his memory and to consign him to

oblivion.” 73 All the tricks of the Sophic came to full flower among the Arabs; the

organized schools, inheriting the teachings of the Sophists, had all the power. When one

scholar in his old age admitted extensive

forgeries, the Doctors replied: “What you

said then seems to us more trustworthy than

your present assertion,” and there was

nothing he could do about it. 74

Proposition 8. There are certain inescapable limitations to the Sophic that,

while they do not destroy its sway fatally, vitiate its power for good and disqualify its

claims to rule.

Modern Statements: “I doubt if we get

very far by the intellect alone,” claimed

Whitehead. “I doubt if the intellect carries us very far. . . . The longer I live the more I am impressed by the enormous, the unparalleled genius of one philosopher, and that is

Plato.” 75 The Sophic is reluctant to admit its limitations, but they are there: “The most

useful approach for explaining evolutionary

changes is still teleology, an uncomfortable

state of affairs for the schoolbook logic

which poses as philosophy of science. . . .

Today, biologists are ashamed of teleology,”

though their “ateleological attitude . . .

verges on sterility, and indeed might signify

such, were it not that teleological reasoning

is substantially more common in the laboratory and field than in the research

papers.” 76 “It is not easy for a child to abandon the purposeful perception of the

world so dear to his heart and go over to the

grim causality of natural science, . . . the

discipline of school studies.” But which

picture is right? “The picture of the world

actually observed may suggest the

incompleteness of the principles of the exact

sciences”; the school “tames the spirit of

man and laces it into the Spanish boot of

logical thinking. . . . The trouble . . . lies not in the incompleteness of knowledge . . . but

in the deep discrepancy between the world

of the exact sciences and the real world. ”77

Evolution was found wanting, but there was

nothing to take its place, so “this theoretical bankruptcy has forced us back into the

evolutionist fold in spite of ourselves. ”78

Though Proconsul “is not a good candidate

as an ancestor of the gibbons and siamangs, .

. . at the moment he is the best fossil

evidence available for the data and

provenience we seek”—so we accept him!79

While the Sophic has always claimed

the infinite view of the Mantic, today

“absolute limits” are beginning to appear:

Once “geometry was science and seemed

inexhaustible—yet in 300 years it was

exhausted”; there is an absolute limit to the

number of crystal forms or chemical

elements that can exist: “The implications of

this have crept almost unnoticed upon the

chemists and the physicists. Placing such

limitations upon nature runs quite contrary to the traditional tenets of empiricism. ”80

“Then, one night at a meeting of one of the

Cambridge scientific clubs . . . I heard one of the greatest mathematical physicists say, with complete simplicity:‘. . . in a sense, physics and chemistry are finished sciences.’ . . . We

were in the sight of the end. It seemed incredible to me, brought up in the tradition

of limitless searching, mystery beyond

mystery. . . . I resented leaving it. . . . I

wanted him to be wrong. Yet I could see

what he meant. . . . In the whole of chemistry and physics, we were in sight of the end. . . .

It struck me how impossible it would have

been to say this a few years before. Before

1926 no one could have said it, unless he

were a megalomaniac or knew no

science.” 81 “The external walls appear as formidable as ever; but at the very center of

the supposedly solid fortress of logical

thinking, all is confusion. . . . The ultimate basis of both types of logical thinking

[deductive and inductive] is infected, at the

very core, with imperfection. ”82

The authoritarianism of the Sophic is

essential but fatal. Because of it, “at this

moment scientists and sceptics are the

leading dogmatists. Advance in detail is admitted; fundamental novelty is barred.

This dogmatic commonsense is the death of

philosophic adventure. ”83 “Our language is made up only of preconceived ideas and can

not be otherwise. Only these are unconscious

preconceived ideas, a thousand times more

dangerous than the others. ”84 This means following the party line to promotion, with

its “excessive subsidy of the mediocre.” 85

Science can never achieve the objectivity it

boasts: “Pursuit of knowledge [is] based

largely on hidden clues and arrived at and

ultimately accredited, on grounds of personal

judgment.” 86 In science “we take our space and time with a deadly seriousness” though

perception of them has been “furnished to us

by the machinery of our nervous systems,”

and “acquire[d] only by arduous practice.” 87

Man’s “brain corrupts the revelation of his

senses. His output of information is but one

part in a million of his input. He is a sink rather than a source of information. The

creative flights of his imagination are but

distortions of a fraction of his data. Finally, .

. . ultimate universal truths are beyond his

ken.” 88 “If you ask me, ‘How do you know?’

my reply would be, ‘I don’t; I only propose a

guess.’” 89 Outside of mathematics, “no description or ‘definition’ will ever include

all particulars,” while mathematics “deals

with fictitious entities with all particulars

included, and we proceed by

remembering.” 90 “Godel . . . proved that . . .

the question, ‘Is there an inner flaw in this

system?’ is a question which is simply

unanswerable.” 91 “This is a rather shocking thing to say—that science does not furnish

any really ultimate or satisfying explanation.

. . . Scientists—even the greatest ones . . .

cannot agree as to whether and how science

explains anything. . . . The explanations of

science have utility, but . . . they do in sober fact not explain.” 92 The explanation is always a circular process. 93 “The all, some, and none categories of Aristotelian logic are of little value in ethnology, or any other

social science.” 94

“If cause and effect are absolutely

equivalent, the question ‘Why?’ is

meaningless. Therefore the exact sciences

answer only the simplest question in the

cognition of the world, ‘How?’” 95 “It is important to combat the assumption that we

have real pictures of the past; “these remain

possibilities and nothing more,” we will

never achieve proof, “only a stronger

probability” by continued research.

“Personal knowledge in [the exact sciences]

is not made but discovered, and as such it

claims to establish contact with reality

beyond the clues on which it relies [i.e.,

knowing is an art]. It [the skill of the

knower] commits us, passionately and far beyond our comprehension, to a vision of

reality.” 96 “We must be prepared for the possibility that the human brain will never

be able to understand itself, or

consciousness or perhaps the nature of life

itself. If so . . . the theory of dialectical

materialism will be disproved.” 97

“The world . . . will always be different

from any statement that science can give of

it. . . . We are always restating our

restatement of the world.” 98 “In atomic physics we deal with the sort of world

which would be sensed by intelligent beings

endowed only with a clumsy sense of

touch.” 99 There is in our knowledge “a vast gap which physics shows no signs of ever

being able to bridge. . . . It may even be that whatever it is that is peculiar to life and

particular to thought lies outside the scope of

physical concepts.” 100 “So long as we, like good empiricists, remember that it is an act

of faith to believe our senses, that we corrupt but do not generate information, and

that our most respectable hypotheses are but

guesses, . . . we [may] ‘rest assured that . . .

[we are not] sinful man aspiring to the place

of God.’” 101 “Newton’s first law illustrates another point, that the physical sciences are

based on an act of faith.” 102 “The structure of any language, mathematical or daily, is such that we must start . . . with undefined terms. .

. . These undefined words have to be taken

on faith. They represent some kind of

implicit creed.” 103 Thus we must dispense with the whole foundation of the Sophic:

“All propositions which form the basis of

scientific knowledge are of such a nature that universal agreement could be obtained about

them.” 104 The physicist only wins back from Nature what he himself has put into the

picture. Quantum theory and relativity “teach the same lesson, . . . namely, that the world is not constructed according to the principles of common sense. ”105

Ancient Statements: At the very

beginning, the limitations of the Ionian

School of physical science were pointed out

by Heraclitus, who thereby earned himself

the unflattering epithet of ho skoteinos,

which, as Sophocles uses the word, does not

mean “the obscure” so much as “the

recalcitrant,” “the gloomy one,” the man who

throws cold water on things. Heraclitus

asked just how reliable the human organism

is as a gatherer and interpreter of

information: how well equipped are we to

read Bacon’s “Book of Nature”? Men’s eyes

and ears are, to say the least, unreliable

instruments,106 and if their senses are feeble, their interpretative faculties are even more

so: all men are more or less asleep, and

never completely sober. Mere information ( polymathia) is pointless for all the pride we take in it; the Sophoi have done with God

once for all—but they are always talking

about him: they are seeking the same

objective as religion—to explain everything.

And what are their chances of succeeding?

What about the objects they observe? They

are always changing even while they seek to

limit and define them—“all things flow; . . .

you can’t step into the same river twice.” 107

The observer’s own position is purely

relative, yet everything depends on it: “The

road up and the road down are the same

road” 108—it all depends on the way you are facing. So what hope have we for real

knowledge? Revelation, says Heraclitus: “A

man should listen to the spirits ( daimones, the same word is used by Socrates)109 as a child listens to an adult” ;110 our individual minds are pretty dull, but through the ages

there exists an unmistakable consensus of humanity about things, an ethos which is not the product of reason but of revelation; there is a common divine logos in which we all

have a share, and that is the one thing we can be really sure of, “the criterion of truth. ”111

The great Sophists—Gorgias, Protagoras,

Empedocles, and others, as well as Socrates

and Plato and Aristotle—all dealt with the

limitations of the Sophic mind.112

Notes to Part 3

Footnotes

^1. Herbert Spencer, First Principles (New York: Appleton, 1898), 12.

^2. Nicolas Berdyaev, Solitude and Society (London: Centenary, 1938), 5, 12.

^3. Karl R. Popper, Conjectures and Refutations (New York: Basic Books, 1962), 136-37.

^4. Gottfried Martin, Kant’s Metaphysics and Theory of Science, tr. P. G. Lucas

(Manchester: Manchester University Press,

1955), 129.

^5. Nigel Calder, Mind of Man (New York: Viking, 1970), 262.

^6. Ibid., 95 (emphasis added).

^7. Warren Weaver, “The Imperfections of Science,” American Scientist 49 (March 1961): 110.

^8. Russell Housfeld, “Dissembled Culture: An Essay on Method,” Mankind 6 (November

1963): 50.

^9. Gilbert Murray, Aristophanes (London: Oxford University Press, 1933), 101.

^10. Plutarch, Pericles VI, 1.

^11. Plato, Gorgias 518-19; Werner Jaeger, Paideia: The Ideals of Greek Culture, tr.

Gilbert Highet, 3 vols. (New York: Oxford

University Press, 1945), 1:330-31.

^12. Karl R. Popper, “Science: Problems, Aims, Responsibilities,” Federation Proceedings of the American Societies for Experimental

Biology 22 (1963): 961.

^13. Weaver, “The Imperfections,” 101.

^14. Edmund R. Leach, “We Scientists Have the Right to Play God,” Saturday Evening Post

241 (16 November 1968): 20. Cf. Carl

Sagan, The Dragons of Eden (New York:

Random House, 1977), 237-38.

^15. Wallace O. Fenn, “Front Seats for Biologists,” AIBS Bulletin (December 1960): 16. Cf. Carl Sagan, The Dragons of Eden

(New York: Random House, 1977), 237-38.

^16. Stephen Toulmin, “Contemporary Scientific Mythology,” in Metaphysical Beliefs

(London: SCM Press, 1957), 61.

^17. Morris R. Cohen, American Thought: A Critical Sketch (New York: Collier Books, 1962), 240.

^18. Lawrence K. Frank, Nature and Human Nature (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers

University Press, 1951), 151.

^19. Julian Jaynes, “The Routes of Science,”

American Scientist 54 (March 1966): 95.

^20. Alfred N. Whitehead, Science and the

Modern World, Lowell Lectures, 1925 (New York: Macmillan, 1962), 275.

^21. G. M. Trevelyan, History and the Reader (London: Cambridge University Press,

1945), 24-25.

^22. Harlow Shapley, in Life in Other Worlds, A Symposium Sponsored by Joseph E.

Seagram and Sons (1 March 1961): 27.

^23. Fenn, “Front Seats,” 14.

^24. Toulmin, “Contemporary Scientific Mythology,” 61.

^25. Dorsey Hager, “Fifty Years of Progress in Geology: The Presidential Address to the

Utah Geological Society,” Geotimes 2/2

(August 1957): 12.

^26. Albert Guérard, Fossils and Presences (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,

1957), 43.

^27. Hugh R. Trevor-Roper, Men and Events (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1957),

311, 313.

^28. Popper, “Science: Problems,” 961.

^29. Toulmin, “Contemporary Scientific

Mythology,” 62.

^30. Edwin Balmer and Philip Wylie, When Worlds Collide (New York: Lippincott,

1933), 344.

^31. “The Integrity of Science: A Report by the AAAS Committee on Science in the

Promotion of Human Welfare,” American

Scientist 53 (June 1965): 194.

^32. Charles R. Dechert, “Cybernetics and the Human Person,” International

Philosophical Quarterly 5 (February 1965): 32-33.

^33. Commodian, Instructiones adversus Gentium Deos 19 and 22, in PL 5:215-18.

^34. Murray, Aristophanes, 236.

^35. Ibid., 226-27.

^36. Plutarch, Moralia 853, quoted in Murray, Aristophanes, 215.

^37. J. F. Dobson, Greek Orators (London: Methuen, 1919), 198.

^38. Hugh Nibley, “Victoriosa Loquacitas: The Rise of Rhetoric and the Decline of

Everything Else,” Western Speech 20 (Spring

1956): 60; reprinted in this volume, pages 247-48.

^39. Edward Chiera, They Wrote on Clay: The Babylonian Tablets Speak Today (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1938), 110.

^40. Hugo Winckler, “Staat und Verwaltung,” in Eberhard Schrader, ed., Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament (Berlin: Reuther and Reicherd, 1903), 169-70.

^41. John E. Sandys, A History of Classical Scholarship (New York: Hafner, 1958),

1:373.

^42. J. B. Bury, A History of the Later Roman Empire, From Arcadius to Irene, 2 vols.

(New York: Macmillan, 1889), 1:315.

^43. Jean Gage, “La propagande sérapiste et la lutte des empereurs flaviens avec les

philosophes (Stoïciens et Cyniques),” Revue philosophique de la France 149 (1959): 73-100.

^44. Hugo Rahner, Greek Myths and Christian Mystery (New York: Harper and Row,

1963), 195.

^45. Wilhelm Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur, in Walter Otto, ed., Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft

Munich: Beck, 1940), 3:1:1:37.

^46. Cf. Nibley, “Victoriosa Loquacitas,” 63-64, 70-71; reprinted in this volume, pages 253-54, 265-67.

^47. Goldziher, Vorlesungen, 44.

^48. Eduard Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2 vols., 3rd ed. (Leipzig: Teubner, 1915), 2:771.

^49. Francis Bacon, Novum Organum I, 71.

^50. M. A. MacConaill in “European vs.

American Anthropology,” Current

Anthropology 6 (June 1965): 306.

^51. Albert G. Ingalls, “The Carboniferous Mystery,” Scientific American 162 (January 1940): 14.

^52. E. Hirshler, “Prehistory and the Birth of Civilization,” Comparative Studies in

Society and History 7 (1964): 97.

^53. L. Hudson, “The Stereotypical Scientist,”

Nature (21 January 1967): 229.

^54. M. G. Rutten, The Geological Aspects of

the Origin of Life on Earth (New York: Elsevier, 1962), 125.

^55. I. Bernard Cohen, “Orthodoxy and Scientific Progress,” Proceedings of the American

Philosophical Society 96 (1952): 505.

^56. Ibid., 505-6.

^57. Walter Sullivan, We Are Not Alone, The Search for Intelligent Life on Other Worlds (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), 147-48.

^58. Anthony Standen, Science Is a Sacred Cow (New York: Dutton, 1950), 18.

^59. Science News Letter (17 July 1954): 40.

^60. Ronald Good, “Natural Selection Re-examined,” The Listener (7 May 1959):

797.

^61. Robert H. Lowie, “Evolution and Cultural Anthropology,” American Anthropologist 48

(April-June 1946): 231.

^62. G. A. Kerkut, gen. ed., Implications of Evolution, International Series of

Monographs on Pure and Applied Biology;

Division: Zoology, vol. 4 (New York:

Pergamon, 1960), 155-56.

^63. Carleton Beals, Nomads and Empire Builders (New York: Chilton, 1961), 67-68.

^64. Norman W. Pirie, “Some Assumptions Underlying Discussion on the Origins of

Life,” Annals New York Academy of

Sciences 69 (1957): 373.

^65. Tatian, Oratio adversus Graecos (Oration to the Greeks) 3, in PG 6:809.

^66. Epictetus, Discourses I, 12, 21; I, 18, 2-4; II, 8, 7. Cf. Titus Maccius Plautus, The

Captives 300-308.

^67. Philostratus, Life of Apollonius II, 30.

^68. The Life of Apa Cyrus, in E. A. Wallis Budge, Coptic Texts: Coptic Martyrdoms

Etc. in the Dialect of Upper Egypt, 5 vols.

(London: Oxford University Press, 1914),

4:383-85, fol. 25b, 27a.

^69. F. J. E. Raby, A History of Secular Latin Poetry in the Middle Ages, 2 vols. (London: Oxford University Press, 1934), 1:75.

^70. John Chrysostom, Adversus Oppugnatores Eorum Qui Vitam Monasticum Inducant 3, in PG 47:363.

^71. Hippocrates, The Nature of Man I, 1-35.

^72. Hippocrates, Ancient Medicine I, 1-27.

^73. Paul E. Kahle, The Cairo Geniza, The Schweich Lectures of the British Academy,

1941 (London: Oxford University Press,

1947), 193.

^74. Reynold A. Nicholson, A Literary History of the Arabs (London: Cambridge University Press, 1953), 134; cf. Carl Brockelmann,

Geschichte der arabischen Literatur

(Leipzig: Amelang, 1901), 1:13, 80-81, 95,

126, 128, 185-86, 197, 200, 220-27.

^75. Alfred N. Whitehead, quoted in Lucien Price, Dialogues of Alfred North Whitehead (Boston: Little, Brown, 1954), 132.

^76. Harry Grundfest, “Opinions on Darwin a Century After,” Science and Society 24

(1960): 152.

^77. Nikolai Kozyrev, “An Unexplored World,”

Soviet Life (November 1965): 27.

^78. Kenneth E. Bock, “Evolution and Historical Process,” American Anthropologist 54

(October-December 1952): 494.

^79. Charles F. Hockett and Robert Ascher, “The Human Revolution,” American Scientist 52

(March 1964): 73 (emphasis added).

^80. P. LeCorbeiller, “Crystals and the Future of Physics,” Scientific American 188 (January 1953): 56.

^81. C. P. Snow, The Search (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1958), 168-69.

^82. N. Goodman, quoted in Weaver, “The Imperfections,” 109.

^83. Price, Dialogues of Alfred North Whitehead, 7.

^84. Henri Poincaré, The Foundations of Science (New York: Science, 1929), 129.

^85. Vannevar Bush, quoted in Eric Hodgins,

“The Strange State of American Research,”

Fortune (April 1955): 214.

^86. Michael Polanyi, “The Unaccountable Element in Science,” Philosophy 37

(January 1962): 14.

^87. P. W. Bridgman, “Science and Common Sense,” Scientific Monthly 79 (July 1954): 36.

^88. Warren S. McCulloch, “Mysterium Iniquitatis of Sinful Man Aspiring into the

Place of God,” Scientific Monthly 80

(January 1955): 39.

^89. Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, 152.

^90. Alfred Korzybski, Science and Sanity (New York: Science, 1933), 68.

^91. Weaver, “The Imperfections,” 109.

^92. Ibid., 106-7, 111.

^93. See Rollin W. Workman, “What Makes an Explanation,” Philosophy of Science 31

(July 1964): 241-54.

^94. Harold E. Driver and William C. Massey,

“Comparative Studies of North American

Indians,” Transactions of the American

Philosophical Society 47 (July 1957): 438.

^95. Kozyrev, “An Unexplored World,” 43.

^96. Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1958), 64.

^97. Fenn, “Front Seats,” 16.

^98. George H. Mead, Movements of Thought in the Nineteenth Century (Chicago: University

of Chicago Press, 1962), 507-8.

^99. P. T. Matthews, The Nuclear Apple (London: Chatto and Windus, 1971), 127.

^100. Ibid., 141-42.

^101. McCulloch, “Mysterium Iniquitatis,” 39

(emphasis added).

^102. F. A. Vick, “The Making of Scientists,” The Listener 61 (29 January 1959): 196.

^103. Korzybski, Science and Sanity, 152-53

(emphasis added).

^104. C. D. Hardie, Background of Modern Thought (London: Watts, 1947), 124-25.

^105. Bridgman, “Science and Common Sense,”

33 (emphasis added).

^106. Heraclitus, On the Universe 4.

^107. Ibid., 41.

^108. Ibid., 69.

^109. Plato, Apology 24C, 26B, 27C, E.

^110. Heraclitus, On the Universe 97; in Socrates’s works see Plato, Apology 24C, 26B, 27C, E.

^111. Heraclitus, On the Universe 1.

^112. Nibley, “Victoriosa Loquacitas,” 57-58; reprinted in this volume, pages 243-45.

Part 4: Proposition 9 to

Conclusion

Proposition 9. The world without the Mantic offers the best test of the Sophic. It is marked by (A) piteous disappointment, (B) a

puzzling deadness of spirit, and (C) a world

plagued by doubt, insecurity, cynicism, and

despair.

A. The Sophic program always ends in

failure, leading to disappointment and

disillusionment among its advocates.

Modern Statements: It now appears that

“the nineteenth century, which believed itself boldly progressive, was spiritually a period

of obscurantism and reaction. ”1 The vast promises of the nineteenth century have not

been realized. 2 The scientists, especially astronomers, have turned out to be very poor

scientific prophets; and as a rule the better

the scientist, the weaker his prophetic

powers—they lack the Mantic touch.3

Ecological crises “reveal serious

inadequacies” which hitherto escaped notice

in many areas. 4 There has been a comical disproportion between the promises and

pretensions of anthropology and its

accomplishments. 5 “It is obvious . . . that the Wellsian dream [of a mechanized utopia] has

turned into a nightmare.” 6 With all the talk and promise of the exciting quest for

knowledge, “only one new chemical reaction

[has been] discovered by an American

chemical company during the last fifteen

years.” 7 “Practically all who are now Ph.D.s want to be told what to do. . . . They seem to be scared to death to think up problems of

their own,” while the “idea for a jet engine .

. . was met with a massive indifference from the scientific bureaucracy.” 8 “In social science, particularly, methodology is being

made the route to prestige.” 9 “Fashions in topics of study and methods of research have

come one after another. . . . As a result we

have botanists who know no plants and

zoologists who know no animals.” 10 “Our wealth of scientific gadgets and our vast

organization of scientific projects are in

heavy disproportion to our depth of

scientific thought. We ‘research the hell’ out of everything: we contemplate very little.” 11

In philology and scholarship a deterioration

of knowledge has taken place in the last

thirty years, especially in America. Today

the tendency in linguistics is in the “direction of overall anarchy” in which most

classifications of unwritten languages

contain “elements of unreliability.” 12 In philosophy, “how many doctor’s theses . . .

are ever actually read by any one except the examiners?” 13 Instead of an insatiable, predicted demand for scientists and

engineers, most of them soon become

obsolescent. 14

Ancient Statements: With the rise of

rationalist (Sophic) Greek civilization, “one

might seem to have got a principle of

continuous progress. . . . In our modern

civilization, which reincarnates the Hellenic

principle, we ordinarily believe that such

continuous modification and improvement is

going on. But in the ancient Hellenic

civilization the promise and potency of its

principle in every line of activity . . .

seemed to meet with an arrest as suddenly as it had begun. ”15 Bevan is mystified by this: Why did Hellenism, in the very moment

of completing its conquest, become

paralyzed? Why does the study of Greek

literature always stop at the threshold of the

Hellenistic period? Because only the Mantic writers are interesting! The new education of

the Greeks thought of itself as throbbing with life and vitality; to keep up the illusion it had to go on progressively adding lurid to

sensational materials until in the end “the

powerful spicing had become the main dish”

and all was ruined. 16 Education did nothing to check intellectual and moral decline and,

if anything, accelerated it. 17 Intellectually everything ground to a halt, just as the school reached the peak of its splendor. 18 There was a paralyzing finality about the arguments

of the Sophists, who “looked for no

revelation.” Under Sophist tutelage, “the

Athenians were already losing their sense of

political reality, . . . growing impatient of

sincerity and plain truth.” 19 Isocrates’

conviction that education would be the

solution to everything turned out to be a great disappointment. Contrary to expectation,

“There was no steady advance of natural and mental science to serve as breeding ground”

for future scientists among the followers of

Aristotle, whose teaching was converted into

a “purely conceptual scholasticism. ”20

Though the Sophists gave us “a 2000-year

unbroken tradition” of rational learning

beginning with Gorgias, the Schoolmen

expended those centuries in the usual

perennial arguments over the relative merits

of the New versus the Old Education. 21 “And the intellectual scribblers of the decadent

period” strongly influenced the thinking of

the Late Renaissance. 22

B. The result is nihilism, societal

breakdown, and a puzzling deadness of

spirit.

Modern Statements: The “clearest and

the most comprehensive expression” of the

world view of Darwinism was given by

Tyndale, noting that in the “‘purely natural and inevitable march of evolution from

atoms . . . to the proceedings of the British

Association for the Advancement of Science’

. . . life is of profound unimportance,” being a “mere eddy in the primeval slime. ”23 “We must in all circumstances learn to accept the

fact that . . . in the longest run, the sum of all human endeavour has no recognizable

significance. ”24 “A scientific explanation of the course of evolution therefore avoids

reference to either purpose or progress in its recognition of the factors of change. ”25 “Life on earth is nothing but some elements

expressing generally available energy in a

specific rhythm. Man is nothing but a living

creature expressing general tendencies in

special reflections.” 26 “That all the labours of the ages . . . are destined to extinction in the vast death of the solar system, . . .

beneath the debris of a universe in ruin, . . .

[is] so nearly certain, that no philosophy which rejects them can hope to stand.” 27

Hence the obsession with entropy, “the rigid

determinism desiccating the world actually

follows from the equations of mechanics and

is the essence of its laws.” 28 “At the end [we find the mute and terrifying world of

Pascal’s ‘libertin,’ the senseless world of

modern scientific philosophy. In the end] we

find nihilism and despair.” 29 “Such happiness as life is capable of comes from

the full participation of all our powers in the endeavor to wrest from each changing

situation of experience its own full and

unique meaning.” 30

Determined attempts are made,

especially in England, to obliterate all

distinction between the human mind and the

automatic computer. The idea is “that man, if

he is indeed nothing but an improved beast,

can by one more easy step be nothing more

than a mere machine—an object which science can wholly analyze, wholly capture

within its special framework.” 31 The robot works on exactly the same behavioristic

principles as James Watson’s or John

Dewey’s human being; there is no essential

difference between them. 32 Already people are being programmed to act as machines,

“to behave like computers . . . I [Gordon

Taylor] am shocked that [the University of

Michigan] tolerated this,” 33 while the fundamental and eternal battle between good

and evil in humanity is disbelieved. “That

we can design ethical robots . . . is enough to prove that man’s moral nature needs no

supernatural source.” 34 “There is no morality in life, no truth, no goodness, and no beauty.

Life in all its adaptability and elasticity is as elemental as iron or sulfur or oxygen or

carbon. This is the correct perspective of

life. It would indeed save much trouble and

avoid many unnecessary errors if philosophers and scientists could look at life in the correct perspective.” 35 “I like a philosophy which exalts mankind. To

degrade it is to encourage men to vice,”

writes Diderot, yet in the next line goes on:

“When I have compared men to the immense

space which is over their heads and under

their feet, I have made them ants that bustle

about on an anthill. . . . Their vices and their virtues, shrinking in the same proportion, are reduced to nothingness.” 36 Science “is teaching them for the first time to use their

minds, not to seek reassurance in the face of life’s suffering and separation, and not to look for some escape from transitoriness that

is one of the unavoidable features of

existence, but to strengthen and multiply the

connective links that establish human life

more firmly in its natural habitat by

eliminating error and illusion and distortion

and rendering more and more transparent our relations with one another and with the rest

of nature.” 37 Thus it takes the easy way and pushes downhill, making a virtue of the

negative: as if men did not already recognize

their miserable state! Science gives us a

world without values: aesthetic, ethical,

religious, “But a world which is without

value, Whitehead points out, is also a world

without meaning. . . . The world just is; it

cannot be explained.” 38 This was the great appeal of science to the Marxists: “The goal

was a completely materialistic theory of

life.” 39 Marx thought his system was

“somehow deducible from Darwin’s

discoveries. He proposed to acknowledge

his indebtedness by dedicating Das Kapital to Darwin.” 40 On the other hand, A.

Wheelis’s End of the Modern Age shows

how laissez-faire capitalism was the direct

offspring and corollary of the same

naturalistic determinism, with the same amoral materialism. So we read

conscientious scholarly Russian studies on

“From the Other Side to This Side: A Guide

to Atheism,” “Concreteness in Studying the

Overcoming of Religious Survivals,”

“Atheistic Education and the Overcoming of

Religious Survivals,” and “The Principles of

Scientific Atheism in Technical Colleges.”

Ancient Statements: How closely the

ancient Sophic attitude matches the modern

is revealed in a statement of Professor

Enslin of Harvard: Clement of Alexandria

scorns the” ‘simple’ Christians” who were

“afraid of Greek philosophy as children fear

ghosts. ”41 Though Clement’s own writings are full of “rubbish . . . triple-A nonsense; . .

. frequent highly fanciful, at times grotesque, derivations of words and terms,” even

“pathetic nonsense,” they at least show him

to be “a man who prized insight, who

preferred the voice of reasoned conviction to the braying of Balaam’s ass.” 42 In the same spirit, Origen, also a product of the

University of Alexandria, wrote, when he

read the Torah, “I blush to think that God

could have given these laws; the laws of

men, of the Romans, Athenians, Spartans, for

example, are far nobler and more

reasonable.” 43 “Modern humanity for the most part shares the view of Pliny” that “the

belief in rebirth or life after death is nothing but a pacifier for children and belongs to a

mortality greedy for everlasting life.” 44 The strength of the Sophic is its appeal to the

obvious, its contemptuous dismissal of belief

in anything we cannot see, which enabled it

to turn the Mantic out of doors with ease,

merrily debunking anything that required an

effort of faith or imagination. 45

The credo of the educated was and

remained Horace’s Nil admirari “don’t take

anything seriously” 46—Horace describes himself good naturedly as a cheerful pig

from the sty of Epicurus; but as for believing in anything— credat Judaeus Appeles—let the Jews believe that sort of stuff! The same

depressing and hopeless attitude dominates

in the Wisdom Literature of the Egyptians47

and of the Babylonians. 48

C. It is the moral condition of life in a world without Mantic that most strongly

proclaims the bankruptcy of the Sophic.

Modern Statements: “The beginning of

modern science is also the beginning of a

calamity. ”49 Why? For one thing, robbing life of meaning makes a hash of morality. The

fundamental principle of modern physics is

that “the transition of the world into the

equilibrium state [entropy], and hence its

death, is inevitable and irreversible. . . .

Thus, the world is to become a sheer desert-

like monotony. . . . Despite its significance and progress, theoretical mechanics seems a

dry or even dull science. Perhaps this is an

emotional indicator of the incompleteness of

the principles of the exact sciences. The

trouble here,” continues Nikolai Kozyrev, is

“the deep discrepancy between the world of

the exact sciences and the real world,” while

all are taught to believe that the world of

science is the real world and the only world. 50 “Thus it comes about, fantastic though it may sound, that men lie with their

neighbour’s wives denuded of the last shred

of a guilty conscience because observations

of the changes of Mercury’s perihelion

enabled Einstein to alter our ideas about

space-time!” 51 The “problem of evil, . . .

science for five hundred years has

deliberately excluded from its purview. ”52

“The force that devastated Hiroshima is

really insignificant by comparison with the

force that devastated the district of Watts,” 53

but both may be traced to the same immoral

source. “There is no longer a philosophy of

nature; . . . the whole field of the knowledge of sensible nature is given over to the

sciences of phenomena, to empiriological

science. . . . By the same token there is no

longer any speculative metaphysics. ”54

Science is “now without superior direction

or light, is abandoned to empirical and

quantitative law, and is entirely separated

from the whole order of wisdom.” 55

Everyone wants promotion and prestige

on the ship, “But where is the boat going?

No one seems to have the faintest idea; nor,

for that matter, do they see much point in

even raising the question. . . . Most see

themselves as objects more acted upon than

acting—and their future, therefore,

determined as much by the system as by

themselves. ”56 This is plainly seen in the

dependence of our whole well-being on the imponderables of the Dow Jones averages.

The Sophic promised that it could handle

everything: “Modern science and modern

conditions of life have taught us to meet

occasions of apprehension by a critical

analysis of their causes and conditions”

rather than by appealing to heaven. 57 It has always been promised that mankind could be

freed from all its shackles by technology. 58

But now it turns out that the Sophic does not

even offer escape from dullness. “Truth is not the only aim of science. We want more than mere truth: what we look for is

interesting truth.” 59 This is diametrically opposed to most university departments that

teach that they are only doing their job when

they are dull and, like the Berlin School of

Egyptology, glory in their strict avoidance of anything that might be interesting; they have

found something heroic in mere patient

plodding and had a horror of “Fantasie” and

“Romantik.” The highest reward for them

was professional status, as it is for the

heroes of C. P. Snow’s novels, all eminent

Cambridge scientists who have only one

object in life—to achieve ever more

“eminence.” They will engage in all manner

of fraud and deception to achieve it; their

work interests them only as long as they can

show off to the world and to each other.

“Darwinism has come, and has conquered,

and as a vital influence in the spiritual life, has gone. ”60 Science could not even hold up its own end. “Because of the sterility of its

concepts, historical geology . . . has become

static and unproductive. 61 Since then plate tectonics have livened things up a bit, but

still “most of us refuse to discard or

reformulate, and the result is the present

deplorable state of our discipline.” 62 What kept them going? Showmanship, self-

dramatization: without the stage of the university to show off on, where would most

of us be?

And so we have the present state of the

world described by Chicago University

physicist John R. Platt: “too dangerous for

anything but Utopia.” 63 Science has made it dangerous, but provides no Utopia. Jerome

Wiesner of M.I.T. claimed: “The armaments

race is an accelerating downward-spiral to

Oblivion.” 64 So will accumulation of scientific knowledge save us? It is now so

specialized that “even engineers would not

know how to reconstruct the machinery of

our civilization if it somehow collapsed or

was destroyed.” 65 “The [amount of]

knowledge in the world [in 1960] is

doubling every ten years. . . . Soon . . . our entire culture will have collapsed owing to

its incomprehensive complexity.” 66 We have reached a saturation point, though “probably

99 per cent of human ability has been wholly wasted; even today, those of us who consider

ourselves cultured . . . glimpse the

profounder resources of our minds only once

or twice in a lifetime. 67 There are “many unpleasant ways in which the world can go

wrong [and very few in which it] can go

right.” 68 The human animal may have fatally overreached itself unless it takes on some

sense in the eleventh hour. Meanwhile, we

resign ourselves to Existentialism, “the

philosophical refuge of the despairing spirit

caught in the turmoil of moral crisis. It has

always been—and is today, essentially and

at its core, a bitter-sweet philosophy of

despair. ”69 This is 100 years after William James challenged the world to do the honest

thing and base its philosophy only on the

firm foundation of unyielding despair.

Ancient Statements: The ancients went

through the same experience and collapsed.

With the complete victory of the Sophic mind a namenloses Elend (indefinable malaise) covered the whole glorious Hellenistic

world. Christianity has been blamed for this,

but Christian influence became dominant

only after the churchmen themselves had

gone all out to accommodate to the

prevailing Sophic teaching of the time—that

of Alexandria: then it was that all joy

seemed to go out of the world.70 Long before Christian influence was felt, the world of the Roman Satirists was full blown: an utterly

cynical, immoral, and pessimistic world.

The rational (Sophic) mood of Hellenism

had emancipated men from moral restraints,

when, as today, they “speak and write as if

the relation of the sexes were something that

could be put on a plain, scientific, common

sense basis,” 71 but at the same time, as Bevan shrewdly observes, they became

everywhere obsessed with a passion for

bathing, a constant obsession with fighting dirt and a fanatical desire to flee from it and sweeten themselves—subconscious betrayal

of guilt. 72

Intellectually, the accumulation of

knowledge reached a saturation point when

the cultural and intellectual “deposit of the

past had become too great for any mind to

absorb” and people simply gave up trying, as

they have today. 73 The easy way was to specialize and thus lose sight of the larger

questions of life; the best thinking of the

professors for centuries on end became

thereafter incurably trivial.74 Calls to a revival of Hellenism got nowhere.75 The great antique civilization subsided into a

restless, superficial world of theatromania, mob violence, crime and corruption. 76 The only security was found in the university,

where the doctors held undeviatingly to the

age-old routines of hollow lectures, fierce feuds, and adroit politics, oblivious to the

world collapsing around them. Quintillian

advises the young to “stay away from the big

schools!” with their cynicism and

immorality, but then admits that they do offer the best chances for a career in any field. By the fifth century nobody knew what to

believe, since the schoolmen had made a

virtue of questioning everything without

really looking for an answer—busywork and

self-deception had become the way of life.77

In the end it was the teaching of the

“physicist” that men should look for the

explanation to all things in natural causes

alone that laid the foundation for the ruin of everything, according to Plato. 78

Proposition 10. Our notes add up to

something quite unexpected. I had expected

to do the inevitable and call for a proper

balance between the Sophic and the Mantic,

each of which has its faults as well as its virtues. But that is not the way it turns out at all! Not for me, at least. Nothing could be

plainer than the lesson that the human race in the times under survey has disastrously

neglected the Mantic. The Christian Church

went all out to identify itself with the Sophic, as it still does.

Modern Statements: The founders of

Roman Catholic theology “had a boundless

esteem for the work of the Schools.” 79 To begin with, the Church claims to found its

case on reason. The Catholic believes that he

can produce reasoned and convincing, even

coercive arguments. Even the doctrine of the

Trinity can be proved indirectly by reason,

since “it is not . . . irrational to accept these truths on the authority of the Church,

provided that you can prove by reason that

the Church is infallible”80 and “the credentials of the Roman Catholic Church

can be proved by pure reason and by pure reason alone.” 81 “Medieval philosophy was not so much a servant of theology as theology

was a servant of philosophy. . . . That was

the case of Saint Thomas Aquinas, who

strictly subordinated theology to Aristotelian philosophy.” 82 Under the Scholastic philosophers, “philosophy called ‘Logic’

dominated the schools . . . logica sola

placet, science was everything.” 83 The logica nova84 of the twelfth century was a heritage of the Ancient Sophist schools, “a

triumph of sophistry.” 85 The mystical trends of the seventeenth century were vigorously

condemned by the Church, since revelation

“is universally denied by the scholastics. ”86

Even the early Jesuits were given a bad time

for toying with the idea of revelation.

Modern Protestantism objected to

Mormonism primarily on grounds of

scientific enlightenment—“seeing visions in an age of railways” was Dickens’s withering

comment. 87 Protestantism broke with Scholasticism, but its rejection of revelation led it straight into the arms of nineteenth-century natural science and Hegel’s

philosophy of history, “formulated by

materialism and Darwinism into the dogma

that all historical phenomena may be

explained through mundane causes only and

that their development was or must have

been from a low to a high level.” 88 Biblical criticism insisted on following the rigorous,

unflinchingly skeptical procedures of

science.89 In a spirit of emancipation “they talk of a religion without theology; but when

pressed as to what that means, they offer a

diffuse romantic sentimentalism, with

rhapsodies over a pursuit of goodness . . .

and at last to a sort of perpetual motion ever

‘upward and onward’ but with no indication

of any specific direction.” 90 Alfred North Whitehead sums up the process of

accommodation: Each new scientific

advance has “found the religious thinkers

unprepared,” until “finally, after struggle”

their teachings were “modified and

otherwise interpreted,” so that “the next

generation of religious apologists then

congratulates the religious world on the

deeper insight which has been gained,” and

so it goes with “continued repetition of this

undignified retreat, during many

generations.” 91 And so from the beginning, by a progressive accommodation, the

churches have always remained respectably

Sophic.

Today the churches are suggesting that

they may have erred in this, and are calling

for revelation to rescue them. “Liberalism

was the voice of secular confidence in

science, education and culture. It

accommodated its claims to fit human expectations. . . . For this reason it failed to find wings. Theological accommodationism

is a parasite dependent on its host. . . .

Liberalism is dead, or dying, as secular

confidence wains. ”92

Statements on the Ancient Church:

“From the 5th century on the Church became

an ‘intellectual’ entity” and ever since one

sees in “the Church a thing of reason— un

être de raison.” 93 Mosheim asked: Was the conversion of the Doctors a blessing or a

curse for the Church? to which he replied: “I

must confess myself unable to decide the

point.” In the third century this led to serious clashes between popular faith and the

sophisticated theology of the Doctors. 94 The Doctors won hands-down. The authority of

Alexandria prevailed, “recasting the

permanent elements of the church’s doctrine

in harmony with a religious philosophy of

Grecian character. What the Apologists were compelled to do, these men willingly sought

to accomplish.” 95 By the beginning of the second century, “with perfect impunity . . .

they proceeded to do violence to the

scripture, blithely disregarding the original

teachings, . . . busily working out elaborate

structures of syllogisms. . . . They deserted

the Holy Scriptures for . . . Euclid, . . .

Aristotle, and Theophrastus. ”96 Challenged by Celsus, a doughty champion of the

Sophic, Origen yields to him on every point,

explaining that Celsus does not realize that

real Christians are all for science, too. 97 In a like situation, Octavius points out to his

educated friend that all real Christians are

philosophers, just as he is; the vulgar simply don’t understand. 98 The Churchmen embraced Hellenism even though they knew

it had overcome early Christianity. 99 “In the philosophical interpretation of its

eschatological hope, Christian theology from the very beginning clings to Aristotle,” who

“provided Christian philosophers with all

the elements out of which an adequate

conception of personality could be built up. .

. . One cannot fail to acknowledge the

Aristotelian origin of the main

anthropological ideas in early Christian

theology.” 100 It is possible to call St.

Augustine, the founder of Catholic and

Protestant theology, “the first modern man”

because of his fides quaerens intellectum—

the Mantic seeking to become Sophic. 101

Proposition 11. An approach to the authentically Mantic is (A) desirable, and (B) possible.

A. The need for a “return” to the Mantic is felt today as it was anciently.

Modern Statements: “‘Modern man’ . . .

is the heir of . . . the sceptical tradition. . . .

In the present epoch a large and increasing number of Europeans have expressed the

desire to return [to] . . . the religious

tradition. . . . Whenever they take it into their head to ‘return,’ the shades of all the great

sceptics, Pierre Bayle and Voltaire, Ernest

Renan and Sigmund Freud and the rest, rise

up around them and persuade them, with

considerable success, that they cannot go

back. This is the religious dilemma of

‘modern man.’” 102 They cannot go back, because they were never there—their

religion was always Sophic. “The trouble

with the Bible has been its interpreters, who

have scaled and whittled down that sense of

infinitude into finite and limited concepts. . .

. Here we are with our finite beings and

physical senses in the presence of a universe

whose possibilities are infinite, and even

though we may not apprehend them, those

infinite possibilities are actualities. ”103

“God grant that we are mistaken. But if we have read the signs of the times correctly, . . .

the only salvation for mankind will be found

in religion.” 104 “The ruling concept of our day, the degrading and life-impoverishing

error of a Nature which is not deeply and

inwardly bound to our own natures, must be

overcome. The idea of a spiritual life

without spirit, that can be examined like a

problem in physics, must be overcome.” 105

Ancient Statements: Plato and

Aristotle, after mastering the Sophic, both

turned whole-heartedly to the Mantic quest.

In the pagan world the cult of Serapis was a

determined attempt to turn Mantic; in the

Christian, the turning to Monasticism,

pilgrimages, and the temple show a yearning

for the Mantic, 106 all strenuously opposed by the Doctors of the Church.

B. Is it possible?

“But today the Baconian approach is all but dead. . . . How does a new hypothesis

come into existence? That is where intuition

comes in.” Peter Medawar claims that

“Scientists are usually too proud or too shy”; where intuition is concerned, “they feel it to be incompatible with their conception of

themselves as men of facts and rigorous

inductive judgments.” 107 Some scientists have suggested, to avoid yielding any purely

scientific ground, the idea of man initiating a line of robots which then independently

culminate in the production of a perfect

robot, which proceeds to create—a human

race!108 thus bringing God into the picture without having to apologize! Today there is

increasing realization in the churches that

“the living God to Whom men address their

prayers is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and

Jacob, not the philosophers’ God, the idea of the Absolute.” 109 Countless articles today

point out that we cannot attain the Mantic without revelation. For a definitive

statement, see the first section of the

Doctrine and Covenants.

We are not advocating pagan religion in preference to modern science, since both stand on the same foundation through

centuries of accommodation. Yet some

Christian leaders view Greek Mantic with

respect and even call for a return to it

through Christian channels!110 The true seeker seeks everywhere—he is a true

scientist—but to search he must be a

believer; for even in the lab, “Ye receive no

witness until after the trial of your faith”

(Ether 12:6). To illustrate this, “Bacon . . .

was an enemy of the Copernican hypothesis.

Don’t theorize, he said, but open your eyes

and observe without prejudice (faith), and

you cannot doubt that the Sun moves and that

the Earth is at rest. By contrast, Galileo

[wrote:] . . . ‘I cannot . . . express strongly enough my unbounded admiration for the

greatness of mind of these men who

conceived (the heliocentric system) and held

it to be true . . . , in violent opposition to the evidence of their own senses.’”111 It is perfectly proper to believe and seek, to have

faith and hope, and to labor to be worthy of

receiving revelation.

The Mantic is quite as intellectual as the

Sophic: it takes more pure mental calculation

to operate a Urim and Thummim than it does

to use an Egyptian dictionary, and the

brainwork required of the Saints is

formidable (cf. D&C 93:53). In a General

Epistle of the First Presidency in 1851 they

were told, “It becomes us, as Saints of the

Most High, to inform and become informed;

and to treasure up knowledge and wisdom

concerning all things.” 112 Knowledge does not have to be Sophic to be real and exact; in

the Melchizedek Priesthood Manual for 1972/73, President Joseph Fielding Smith

equated real knowledge with the gift of the

Holy Ghost: “There is nothing more

important in the lives of members of the

Church than to have the gift of the Holy

Ghost. There is nothing of greater

importance to the individual member of the

Church than the gift of knowledge, and this

does not come by observation but by

constant study and faith.” 113 “There should be no ‘laymen’ in the Church. . . . If there are any such, then they have neglected their

responsibilities. . . . Each member of the

Church should be so well versed that he, or

she, would be able to discern whether or not

any doctrine taught conforms to the revealed

word of the Lord. Moreover, the members of

the Church are entitled [through obedience to

the commandments] . . . to have the spirit of

discernment. ”114

Proposition 12. It is Science that now challenges the Sophic position. “Science”

has at least discredited the Sophic position.

Since the days of the ancient Atomists, the

Sophic view of life has rested on two

propositions: (A) that all existence is

composed ultimately of discrete irreducible

particles, beyond which and beside which

there is no reality; (B) that all things are the result of the random accidental interactions

of these particles. Both these propositions

are today being declared bankrupt, not by the

philosophers and theologians, but by the

physical and biological scientists.

Modern Statements: The Atomist

proposition explained by Descartes: “From

complex whole move to less complex part.

Reduce! . . . from multiplicity to

uniformity.” 115 Hume: “You will find it [the whole] to be nothing but one great machine,

subdivided into an infinite number of lesser

machines.” 116 “Humanities strove to become sciences, each science to become physics, . .

. the ultimate destination in every field being always that final elementary particle. ”117 But instead of the ultimate particle “our holy

mission to get it all straight has yielded an

ever-proliferating brood of erratically

behaving elementary particles. . . . ‘The

conception of objective reality,’ writes

Heisenberg, ‘has thus evaporated . . . into the transparent clarity of a mathematics that

represents no longer the behavior of

particles but rather our knowledge of this

behavior.’” 118 “The structure of a physical system such as a proton is now seen to be no

absolute thing . . . but a relative concept

which depends on the energy involved and

the particular properties which are being

studied. . . . There is no substance in the

argument that physics must ultimately have a

full stop in constituent parts too simple to be

analysed further. ”119 "[Banging] the hadrons together . . . has completely upset the atomist notion that there is a limit to divisibility. . . .

As the energy is increased there is no logical limit to . . . what may be found as we look

deeper into space.” 120 “There is really only one law, which is that the total energy is

conserved.” 121 “Energy . . . is the fundamental physical quantity of which mass

and radiation—matter and light—are two

manifestations.” 122

The clearest expression of the theory of

random chance evolution is Robert Jastrow’s

popular book Red Giants and White

Dwarfs123 (which has been required reading in some courses at BYU): “Yet the fact is

that a single thread of evidence runs from the atom and the nucleus through the formation of

stars and planets to the complexities of the

living organism.” 124 “Darwin saw that the

forms of life existing on the earth today have evolved gradually out of earlier and simpler

beginnings.” 125 “We believe that at the beginning there was only a cloud of gaseous

hydrogen. . . . It was the parent cloud of us

all.” 126 “With the further passage of time, cells developed . . . and living organisms

were started on the long road to the

complexity of the creatures which exist

today.” 127 How? “Life can appear spontaneously in any favorable planetary

environment, and evolve into complex

beings, provided vast amounts of time are

available. "128 “Thousands of skeletons and fossil remains mark the path by which life

climbed upward from its crude

beginnings.” 129 The principle of natural selection is, according to Jastrow, the great

“new law . . . discovered by Charles

Darwin,” which “guides the course of

evolution and shapes the forms of living

creatures—on this planet and on all planets on which life has arisen—as firmly and as

surely as gravity controls the stars and the

planets.” 130

Karl Popper would deny this so-called

law of nature even the title to a scientific

theory: “There is a difficulty with

Darwinism. . . . It is far from clear what we

should consider a possible refutation of the

theory of natural selection. If . . . we accept that statistical definition of fitness which

defines fitness by actual survival, then the

survival of the fittest becomes tautological,

and irrefutable. ”131 Other objections come from biologists, geologists, physicists, and

others. “I want to warn against . . . the basic assumption . . . that what is more simple in

metabolism biochemically is more primitive

and consequently older in the history of life.

This assumption is entirely unjustified. 132 In geology also,” ‘simple’ has also been largely

confused with ‘primitive’ and with

‘early.’” 133 “The synthesis by natural inorganic processes of such large,

complicated molecules [necessary for life]

happens to be well-nigh impossible under

present environmental circumstances. . . .

These large organic molecules cannot at

present exist on their own, inorganically; . . .

they cannot be formed regularly, or even

rarely, in natural inorganic chemistry and

even if this would be possible, they are

liable to immediate destruction. ”134 Even if life could be reproduced in the laboratory,

“we could not say from our experiments that

the living material in the universe arose in

this way. . . . The assumption that life arose only once and that therefore all living things are interrelated [Jastrow’s “single thread of

evidence”] is a useful assumption. . . . But

because a concept is useful it does not mean

that it is necessarily correct. ”135 “Nothing is

definitely known about what did happen; all is hypothesis, and though it is simpler to

assume that it was a unique occurrence, there

is no reason why this simple explanation

should be the correct one. ”136 “But it is hard to see how this [natural selection] operates

in the very early stages of development. It is also hard to see why it has led to the

evolution of life forms of ever-increasing

complexity. If survival is the essential

characteristic for trapping fluctuations, very simple organisms would appear to be just as

well, if not better, equipped than

complicated ones. ”137

What many are pointing out today is that

the mechanistic-evolutionary theory reverses both the direction of time and the order of

nature. By the laws of thermodynamics, “left

to itself, everything tends to become more

and more disorderly until the final and

natural state of things is a completely random

distribution of matter. Any kind of order, even that as simple as the arrangement of

atoms in a molecule, is unnatural and

happens only by chance encounters that

reverse the general trend. These events are

statistically unlikely, and the further

combination of molecules into anything as

highly organized as a living organism is

wildly improbable. Life is a rare and

unreasonable thing.” 138

Jastrow is presenting the position of

“the most extreme mechanistic faction . . .

that all phenomena of life are explainable by

means of our present body of physical and

chemical theories. The reason I feel sure that this is not true is that these theories do not seem adequate even for inanimate

phenomena. Most physicists agree that our

present theories do not suffice to understand

the nucleus of the atom, for example.” 139 “In biochemistry, based on this physics, we are

able to account fully only for isolated phenomena, which will cease eventually. I

cannot reconcile physical principles with the

phenomena of life when considering the

whole living unit. It is interesting that Niels Bohr concluded that life is a qualitatively

different attribute of matter, not subject to

current considerations in physics.” 140

Here some recent reflections on the

evolutionary scene by eminent biologists are

not out of place: “Is there any positive proof, from any part of the evidence, that evolution

has, or has not, occurred? There is no visible proof, nor any kind of certain proof, either

way, anywhere. ”141 “This theory can be called the ‘General Theory of Evolution’ and

the evidence that supports it is not

sufficiently strong to allow us to consider it as anything more than a working

hypothesis.” 142 “Of course one can say that the small observable changes in modern

species may be the sort of thing that lead to all the major changes, but what right have we

to make such an extrapolation? We may feel

that this is the answer to the problem, but is it a satisfactory answer? A blind acceptance

of such a view may in fact be the closing of

our eyes to as yet undiscovered factors

which may remain undiscovered for many

years if we believe that the answer has

already been found.” 143 Today

“Neocatastrophism” teaches that during the

earth’s past there have been “drastic turning-

points, the cutting off of animal types,

characterized by a widespread more or less

contemporary extinction of numerous species

and emergence and even exuberance of

others.” This has led eminent geologists to

take positions which are “in opposition to

Darwin’s doctrine of gradual evolution,

natural selection, and extinction as a normal

process.” 144 “The extinction can only have

been a sudden and decisive event,” and we have “not only the dying out of older species

(Stamme), but also the more or less sudden emergence of new ones,” so that we “should

speak of an anastrophe” rather than a

catastrophe. 145 The “argument . . . that the origin of life is essentially a problem in

probability . . . is an insufficient and actually an unsuitable concept. Furthermore, this

appears to me as even a dangerous mental

attitude. It leads to a self-satisfied state of mind. We have an illusion that the problem

can be explained with existing knowledge (a

very natural tendency in scientists) and this

lulls us into an attitude of not thinking really about the problem.” 146

Being tautological in nature, the

evolutionary hypothesis explains very little.

It has “two basic fallacies: . . . (1) it

assumes that there is only one way in which

a certain state of affairs, such as life, can

exist; and (2) it assumes that the probability of a process can be calculated although its

mechanism is unknown.” 147 It is a product of hindsight: its authors wrote the answer-book

first, and then composed the problem around

it. “Science is only restrospectively

logical. ”148 “We might ask, why was the Piltdown monster accepted? The answer is

very simple; it had been taylored [sic]

according to scientific theory. . . . So when

such a creature [a crass forgery] was found,

the anthropologists recognized at once that

they were right. ”149 “Most finds [of early man] were made, and I am proud we can say

this, by men who wanted to find.” 150 “There is no doubt that the horse could have

evolved in the manner described. But had

Mr. Darwin lived fifty million years ago, he

would certainly not have been able to

predict that these changes would occur, even

if he had known how the environment was

going to change. Since his theory would not have served for predictions then, it is not

adequate for an explanation now. ”151 “To say that the known changes could have been brought about by the described machinery

does not explain these changes. . . . An

adequate explanation is one which would

have enabled us to predict the outcome,

before it took place. But none of the present

evolutionary theories enables us to make

such predictions.” 152 “Many more questions will have to be answered before an

evolutionary theory emerges that can make

even simple predictions.” 153

Concerning the seven basic assumptions

of evolution, G. A. Kerkut writes: “The first

point that I should like to make is that these seven assumptions by their nature are not

capable of experimental verification. They

assume that a certain series of events has

occurred in the past. Thus though it may be

possible to mimic . . . this does not mean that these events must therefore have taken place

in the past. All that it shows is that it is

possible for such a change to take place. . . .

We have to depend upon limited

circumstantial evidence for our

assumptions.” 154

Lyall Watson says, “life occurs by

chance and that the probability of its

occurring, and continuing, is infinitesimal. It is even more unlikely that this life could, in the comparatively short time it has existed on this planet, develop into more than a million

distinct living forms. . . . To believe that this took place only by chance places a great

strain on the credulity of even the most

mechanistic biologist. The geneticist

Waddington compares it to ‘throwing bricks

together in heaps’ in the hope that they would

‘arrange themselves into an inhabitable

house.’” 155 In atomic particles “it is the least

massive and therefore longest living states which are the most important. ”156 “The physicochemical principle of selectivity . . .

includes a tacit assumption of acquisition, of positive action, of building up the

improbable and more complex from the more

probable, less complex and of actually

increasing stability as complexity

increases.” 157 All of which actually reverses the order of Nature.

R. Buckminster Fuller has much to say

on this theme. For him evolution

“reassociates those elements in orderly

molecular structures or as orderly organs of

ever-increasing magnitude, thus effectively

reversing the entropic behaviors of purely

physical phenomena.” 158 This requires an explanation: “My continuing philosophy is

predicated, first, on the assumption that in

dynamical counterbalance of the expanding

universe of entropically increasing random

disorderliness, there must be a universal pattern of omniX contracting, convergent,

progressive orderliness” which presents us

with “an overwhelming confrontation of our

experience by a comprehensive intellect

magnificently greater than our own or the

sum of all human intellects.” The glory of

God is intelligence, or, in the words of P. T.

Matthews, “The sorting process—the

creation of order out of chaos— against the natural flow of physical events is something

which is essential to life.” 159 “A human being is, at very least, an assembly of

chemicals constructed and maintained in a

state of fantastically complicated

organisation of quite unimaginable

improbability.” 160 The reverse motion

[opposing the direction of entropy], although

formally allowed, is so improbable that it

can be dismissed as impossible. 161 “Any system will tend to degenerate into a

condition with a minimum amount of mass, the largest number of parts and the maximum

amount of motion.” 162 The answer to this has always been: “You cannot say it is a state of

unimaginable improbability,” 163 because it actually happens. You can see it happen!

Therefore there is nothing fantastic or

miraculous about it.

“For practical reasons,” wrote P. T.

Mora, “we developed a simplifying

scientific approach in physics. We follow the

dictates of Descartes, that one must divide . .

. into as many parts as possible, and then

study the simplest first. . . . However,

complexity is an essential attribute of

biological systems. . . . furthermore, in

physics we avoid teleology, . . . but a certain type of teleological approach must be

pertinent to the study of living systems.” 164

But the simplifying process has come to an

end with the discovery that the ultimate hard,

indivisible particle of the atomists, whose weight and shape alone accounted for all

phenomena, vanishes into energy patterns of

apparently endless complexity. Mr. Wheelis

throws up his hands in despair: “We isolate

what we study, simplify it, break it into

smaller pieces, wash it” 165 and then, lo,

“mechanism disappears at precisely that

point at which we were finally going to nail

it down forever.” 166 “We have sacrificed the world for nothing. ”167 And so it would seem

“we have come a long way on false

credentials. . . . We are not entitled to grace in getting out, to peace with honor.” 168 “We have lived a delusion, we cannot know the

world. Aided or unaided we stumble through

an endless night, locked in a range of

experience . . . given by what we are and

where we live.” 169 He quotes Bridgman of M.I.T.: “Our conviction that nature is

understandable and subject to law arose

from the narrowness of our horizons. . . . We shall find that nature is intrinsically and in its elements neither understandable nor subject

to law. . . . The world is not a world of

reason, understandable by the intellect of

man.” 170 “Between the electrical signals coming through the eye to the brain and our

reaction to . . . a tree in blossom on a fresh spring day, there is a vast gap which physics

shows no signs of ever being able to

bridge.” 171 It may even be that whatever it is that is peculiar to life and particular to

thought lies outside the scope of physical

concepts.” 172 “The Universe is not only queerer than we imagine—it is queerer than

we can imagine[!]" 173 “And the real beginning of education must be the

experimental realization of absolute

mystery.” 174 “And the why-for and how-come of all . . . generalized principles . . .

are all and together Absolute Mystery.” 175

Ancient Statements: If the ancients did not have the sophisticated instruments and

methods now available, what they did have

was far superior to anything that we have

been willing to credit them with so far. Their methods were different, but to judge by the

results, very effective. 176 They had only too great faith in the principles of mechanistic

materialism and natural selection (cf. Alma

30:15-18), and in the end turned from

atomism and determinism to esoteric studies

which have been dismissed as “mystical” but

which present-day investigation shows to

have been astonishingly fruitful in concepts

very close to some of the most sophisticated

scientific speculation of our time. Thus

Matthews notes that “it is fascinating how

close these diagrams [some very advanced

‘quark patterns’] are to the number pattern

which so impressed the Pythagoreans.” 177

The cosmological patterns set forth in

numerous early Christian (“Gnostic”) and Jewish works very recently discovered are

at very least extremely high-class science-

fiction. I myself am at present engaged in

gathering and comparing such work. 178 That Whitehead at the end of his life should turn

to Plato as the best exponent of the reality

around us is an indication of how far the

ancients projected their physical researches

into scientific speculation. In turning to

“mystic” speculations, Plato and Aristotle,

as Werner Jaeger shows, did not turn their

backs to the physical universe. It was the

Neo-Platonists and the later Doctors of the

Christian church, following the lead of the

scholars of Alexandria, who did that.

Notes to Part 4

Footnotes

^1. Albert Guérard, Fossils and Presences (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,

1957), 102.

^2. For laughs, see John Jacob Astor’s, A Journey in Other Worlds: A Romance of the

Future, 6th ed. (New York: Appleton,

1898), 34-35; these pages provide a sketch

of the year 2000.

^3. Arthur C. Clarke, Profiles of the Future (New York: Harper and Row, 1962), chaps. 1 and

2.

^4. “The Integrity of Science: A Report by the AAAS Committee on Science in the

Promotion of Human Welfare,” American

Scientist 53 (June 1965): 176.

^5. See Julian H. Steward, “Cultural Evolution,”

Scientific American 194 (May 1956): 69-80.

^6. Joseph W. Krutch, “If You Don’t Mind My Saying So. . . . .,” American Scholar 35

(Spring 1966): 181.

^7. William H. Whyte, Jr., Organization Man

(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1956), 208.

^8. Ibid., 215, 223.

^9. Ibid., 226.

^10. Albert W. Heere, in a letter to the Editor, in American Institute of Biological Science

(AIBS) Bulletin (December 1960): 5.

^11. Eric Hodgins, “The Strange State of American Research,” Fortune (April 1955): 113.

^12. A. L. Kroeber, “Statistics, Indo-European, and Taxonomy,” Language 36 (1960): 19.

^13. William K. Wright, “The End of the Day,”

The Philosophical Review 55 (July 1946): 328-29.

^14. Julian Jaynes, “The Routes of Science,”

American Scientist 54 (March 1966): 94-95.

^15. Edwyn Bevan, Hellenism and Christianity (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1921),

41 (emphasis added).

^16. Eduard Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2 vol., 3rd ed. (Leipzig: Teubner, 1915), 2:655-56.

^17. John Chrysostom, Oratio in Epistolam ad

Hebraeos XII, 30, in PG 63:211.

^18. Hugh Nibley, “Victoriosa Loquacitas: The Rise of Rhetoric and the Decline of

Everything Else,” Western Speech 20 (Spring 1956): 70-71; reprinted in this volume, pages

265-66.

^19. Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War III, 45, 5.

^20. Werner Jaeger, Aristotle, tr. Richard Robinson (Oxford: Clarendon, 1948), 5.

^21. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2:807.

^22. Ibid., 778.

^23. C. E. M. Joad, Guide to Philosophy (New York: Dover, 1936), 524-25.

^24. F. W. Ostwald, Die Philosophie der Werte, quoted in Stephen Toulmin, “Contemporary

Scientific Mythology,” in Metaphysical

Beliefs (London: SCM, 1957), 30.

^25. T. Neville George, Evolution in Outline (London: Thrift Books, 1951), 118-19.

^26. Rudolf Jordan, The New Perspective (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1951), 177.

^27. Bertrand Russell, quoted in Clarke, Profiles of the Future, 248.

^28. Nikolai Kozyrev, “An Unexplored World,”

Soviet Life (November 1965): 43.

^29. Alexandre Koyré, From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1957), 43.

^30. John Dewey, Living Philosophies (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1931), 27.

^31. Warren Weaver, “The Imperfections of Science,” American Scientist 49 (March 1961): 101.

^32. J. C. Loehlin, “Machines with Personality,”

Science Journal 4 (October 1968): 98.

^33. Gordon Taylor, “Focus,” Science Journal 4

(June 1968): 31.

^34. Warren S. McCulloch, “Mysterium Iniquitatis of Sinful Man Aspiring into the

Place of God,” Scientific Monthly 80

(January 1955): 37.

^35. Jordan, The New Perspective, 144.

^36. Lester G. Crocker, An Age of Crisis: Man and World in Eighteenth Century French

Thought (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1959), 82-83.

^37. Nolin P. Jacobson, “The Cultural Meaning of Science,” Hibbert Journal 65 (Spring 1967): 92 (emphasis added).

^38. Joad, Guide to Philosophy, 565.

^39. M. G. Rutten, The Origin of Life by Natural Causes (New York: Elsevier, 1971), 4.

^40. Theodosius Dobzhansky, “Evolution at Work,” Science 127 (9 May 1958): 1091.

^41. Morton S. Enslin, “A Gentleman among the Fathers,” Harvard Theological Review 47

(October 1954): 241.

^42. Ibid., 230, 238, 239.

^43. Origen, In Leviticum Homilia 7, in PG

12:488-89.

^44. Pavel Poucha, “Das tibetische Totenbuch im Rahmen der eschatologischen Literatur,”

Archiv Orientalni 20 (1952): 162, who

compares Pliny the Elder, Natural History

VII, 55, 189.

^45. Wilhelm Schmid, Geschichte der griechischen Literature (Munich: Beck,

1940), 3:3:11.

^46. Horace, Epistle I, 6, 1.

^47. Adolf Erman, The Ancient Egyptians: A Sourcebook of Their Writings, tr. Aylward M. Blackman (New York: Harper and Row,

1966), 85-88.

^48. W. G. Lambert, Babylonian Wisdom Literature (London: Oxford University

Press, 1960), 33, 35, 41, 77, 81, 109, 266-

67, 278.

^49. Karl Jaspers, quoted in Gerald W. Johnson,

“Some Cold Comfort,” American Scholar

35 (Spring 1966): 193.

^50. Kozyrev, “An Unexplored World,” 27.

^51. John Langdon-Davies, Man and His Universe (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1930), 319.

^52. Johnson, “Some Cold Comfort,” 195.

^53. Ibid.

^54. Jacques Maritain, Science and Wisdom, tr.

Bernard Wall (New York: Charles Scribner’s

Sons, 1954), 48.

^55. Ibid., 50.

^56. Whyte, The Organization Man, 395.

^57. Alfred N. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World, Lowell Lectures, 1925 (New York: Macmillan, 1962), 274.

^58. W. G. Haverbeck, Das Ziel der Technik (Freiburg, 1965), reviewed in Zeitschrift für Geopolitik 15 (1967): 6.

^59. Karl R. Popper, Conjectures and Refutations (New York: Basic Books, 1962), 229.

^60. Joseph Jacobs, quoted in Grey H. Skipwith,

“The Origins of the Religion of Israel,”

Jewish Quarterly Review 12 (1900): 381.

^61. Robin S. Allan, “Geological Correlation and Paleoecology,” Bulletin of the Geological

Society of America 59 (January 1948): 2.

^62. Ibid.

^63. John R. Platt, quoted in R. Buckminster Fuller, “Vision 65 Summary Lecture,”

American Scholar 35 (Spring 1966): 218.

^64. Wiesner, quoted in ibid.

^65. Krutch, “If You Don’t Mind,” 183.

^66. Clarke, Profiles of the Future, 216.

^67. Ibid., 213.

^68. Herman Kahn and Anthony J. Wiener, The Year 2000 (New York: Macmillan, 1967), 263.

^69. Iago Galdston, “Existentialism as a Perennial Philosophy of Life and Being,” Journal of

Existential Psychiatry 1 (Fall 1960): 379.

^70. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2:453-55.

^71. Bevan, Hellenism and Christianity, 156.

^72. Ibid., 145-54.

^73. Friedrich Cauer, “Die Stellung der arbeitenden Klassen in Hellas und Rom,”

Neue Jahrbücher für das klassische

Altertum, Geschichte und deutsche

Literatur 3 (n.d.): 700-702.

^74. Nibley, “Victoriosa Loquacitas,” 70-72; reprinted in this volume, pages 265-69.

^75. Justin, in PG 6:1316 (see response to question 74).

^76. Hugh Nibley, “The Unsolved Loyalty Problem: Our Western Heritage,” Western

Political Quarterly 6 (December 1953): 632-35; reprinted in this volume, pages 196-200.

^77. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 1:20-21, 2:507.

^78. Plato, Gorgias 518-19; Werner Jaeger, Paideia: The Ideals of Greek Culture, tr.

Gilbert Highet, 3 vols. (New York: Oxford

University, 1945), 1:330-31.

^79. W. Bossuet, Judisch-christlicher Schulbetrieb in Alexandria und Rom

(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck, 1915), 6.

^80. Arnold Lunn and J. B. S. Haldane, Science and the Supernatural (New York: Sheed and Ward, 1935), 50.

^81. Arnold Lunn, The Flight from Reason (New York: Dial, 1931), 21.

^82. Nicolas Berdyaev, Solitude and Society (London: Centenary, 1938), 6.

^83. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, 2:712-13.

^84. Maurice de Wulf, History of Mediaeval Philosophy, 2 vols. (New York: Dover, 1952), 1:173.

^85. Ibid., 210.

^86. James Hastings, ed., “Mysticism,” in Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, 12

vols. (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons,

1951), 9:100.

^87. Charles Dickens, “In the Name of the Prophet—Smith!” Household Words 3 (19

July 1851): 385.

^88. Eduard König, “The Modern Attack on the Historicity of the Religion of the Patriarchs,”

Jewish Quarterly Review 22 (1931/32):

120-21.

^89. Herbert W. Schneider, “Evolution and Theology in America [“The Influence of

Darwin and Spencer on American

Philosophical Theology”],” Journal of the

History of Ideas 6 (January 1945): 3-18.

^90. Morris R. Cohen, American Thought: A Critical Sketch (New York: Collier Books, 1962), 240.

^91. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World, 270.

^92. Nels F. S. Ferré, “Which Way British Theology?” Expository Times 70 (July

1959): 305.

^93. Henri Leclercq, "Église,” in Henri Leclercq and Fernand Cabrol, eds., Dictionnaire

d’archéologie chrétienne et de liturgie (Paris: Letouzey et Ané, 1907), 4:2228-30.

^94. J. Lebreton, “Le désaccord de la foi populaire et de la théologie savante,” Revue d’histoire ecclésiastique 19A (1923): 481-83.

^95. Reinhold Seeberg, Text-Book of the History of Doctrines, vol. 1 of History of Doctrines in the Ancient Church (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Book House, 1952), 160.

^96. Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History V, 28, 13-14, in PG 20:516.

^97. Anna Miura-Stange, Celsus und Origenes (Giessen: Töpelmann, 1926) in Zeitschrift

für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft und die Kunde der älteren Kirche, Beiheft 4

(1926): 59-118.

^98. Minucius Felix, Octavius, in G. Goetz, Die literarhistorische Stellung des Octavius von Minucius Felix (Giessen: Töpelmann,

1926), 161-63.

^99. Justin, in PG 6:1316, Question 74.

^100. G. Florovsky, “Eschatology in the Patristic

Age,” in Kurt Aland and F. L. Cross, eds., Studia Patristica II in Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der

altchristlichen Literatur 64 (Berlin:

Akademie-Verlag, 1957), 246, 248.

^101. Martin Grabmann, Geschichte der scholastischen Methode, 2 vols. (Graz: Adademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt,

1957), 2:87-91.

^102. Franklin L. Baumer, Religion and the Rise of Scepticism (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1960), 19-20.

^103. Alfred N. Whitehead, quoted in Lucien Price, “To Live without Certitude,” Atlantic Monthly 193 (March 1954): 59.

^104. Pierre L. du Noüy, Human Destiny (New York: Longmans, Green, 1947), 264.

^105. Cf. Hugh Nibley, “The Return of the Prophets?” in The World and the Prophets

(Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1966), 258-

72; reprinted in CWHN 3:284-98.

^106. Hugh Nibley, “Jerusalem: In Christianity,”

in Encyclopedia Judaica 9:1570-75, and

Hugh Nibley, “Christian Envy of the Temple,” Jewish Quarterly Review 50

(1959/60): 109-23; reprinted in CWHN

4:323-54 and 391-434 respectively.

^107. O. R. Frisch, “Tactics and Strategy of Science,” Science Journal 5 (November

1969): 84, a review of P. B. Medawar’s

Induction and Intuition in Scientific

Thought.

^108. Martin Greenberg, ed., The Robot and the Man (New York: Gnome, 1953), vi.

^109. Berdyaev, Solitude and Society, 20

(emphasis added); cf. Norbert Samuelson,

“That the God of the Philosophers Is Not

the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,”

Harvard Theological Review 65 (1972): 1-28; Robin Attfield, “The God of Religion

and the God of Philosophy,” Religious

Studies 9 (March 1973): 1-9.

^110. See Hugo Rahner, Greek Myths and Christian Mystery (New York: Harper and Row, 1963), xv, 387-90.

^111. Karl R. Popper, “Science: Problems, Aims,

Responsibilities,” Federation Proceedings of the American Societies for Experimental

Biology 22 (1963): 962.

^112. “Fifth General Epistle,” Deseret News, 22

March 1851, 225.

^113. Joseph Fielding Smith, Selections from Answers to Gospel Questions: A Course of

Study for the Melchizedek Priesthood

Quorums of The Church of Jesus Christ of

Latter-day Saints 1972/73 (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1972), 191.

^114. Ibid., 190-91.

^115. Allen Wheelis, The End of the Modern Age (New York: Basic Books, 1971), 33.

^116. Ibid., 34.

^117. Ibid., 43.

^118. Ibid., 64.

^119. P. T. Matthews, Nuclear Apple, 117-18.

^120. Ibid., 116-17.

^121. Ibid., 16.

^122. Ibid., 19.

^123. Robert Jastrow, Red Giants and White Dwarfs (New York: Harper and Row, 1971).

^124. Ibid., 5.

^125. Ibid., 123.

^126. Ibid., 130-31.

^127. Ibid., 139.

^128. Ibid., 152.

^129. Ibid., 155.

^130. Ibid., 157.

^131. Popper, “Science: Problems, Aims, Responsibilities,” 964.

^132. M. G. Rutten, The Geological Aspects of the Origin of Life on Earth (New York: Elsevier, 1962), 124.

^133. Ibid., 125.

^134. Ibid., 46.

^135. G. A. Kerkut, ed., Implications of Evolution, International Series of

Monographs on Pure and Applied Biology;

Division: Zoology, vol. 4 (New York:

Pergamon, 1960), 8.

^136. Ibid., 17.

^137. P. T. Matthews, The Nuclear Apple (London: Chatto and Windus, 1971), 143.

^138. Lyall Watson, Supernature (New York: Doubleday, 1973), 5.

^139. J. G. Kemeny, A Philosopher Looks at Science (Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand,

1959), 211-12.

^140. Peter T. Mora, “The Folly of Probability,”

in Sidney W. Fox, The Origins of

Prebiological Systems (New York:

Academic, 1965), 46.

^141. J. Challinor, “Palaeontology and Evolution,”

in P. R. Bell, ed., Darwin’s Biological Work, Some Aspects Reconsidered (Cambridge:

Cambridge University, 1959), 53.

^142. Kerkut, Implications of Evolution, 157.

^143. Ibid., 154.

^144. Otto H. von Schindewolf,

“Neokatastrophismus,” Zeitschrift der

deutschen geologischen Gesellschaft 114

(1963): 430.

^145. Ibid., 431.

^146. Mora, “The Folly of Probability,” 50.

^147. Norman W. Pirie, “Some Assumptions Underlying Discussion on the Origins of

Life,” Annals, New York Academy of Sciences (1956): 370.

^148. Ibid., 371.

^149. G. H. R. von Koenigswald, “Early Man: Facts and Fantasy,” Royal Anthropological

Institute of Great Britain and Ireland

Journal 94 (1964): 76.

^150. Ibid., 69.

^151. Kemeny, A Philosopher Looks at Science, 200.

^152. Ibid., 199.

^153. Ibid., 207.

^154. Kerkut, Implications of Evolution, 7.

^155. Watson, Supernature, 8.

^156. Matthews, The Nuclear Apple, 105.

^157. Mora, “The Folly of Probability,” 47-48.

^158. Fuller, Intuition, 70.

^159. Matthews, The Nuclear Apple, 143.

^160. Ibid., 142.

^161. Cf. Mora, “The Folly of Probability,” 43, 49.

^162. Ibid., 71-72.

^163. Ibid., 142.

^164. Ibid., 49.

^165. Wheelis, The End of the Modern Age, 61.

^166. Ibid., 62.

^167. Ibid., 70.

^168. Ibid., 77.

^169. Ibid., 115.

^170. Ibid., 65.

^171. Matthews, The Nuclear Apple, 141.

^172. Ibid., 142.

^173. J. B. S. Haldane, in Clarke, Profiles of the Future, 139.

^174. Fuller, Intuition, 50.

^175. R. Buckminster Fuller, Intuition (New York: Doubleday, 1972), 42.

^176. Giorgio de Santillana, The Origins of Scientific Thought (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961).

^177. Matthews, The Nuclear Apple, 100.

^178. For a discussion of cosmological patterns in early Christian (Gnostic) and Jewish works,

see Hugh Nibley, “Treasures in the Heavens:

Some Early Christian Insights into the Organizing of the Worlds,” Dialogue: A

Journal of Mormon Thought 8/3-4 (1973): 76-98; reprinted in CWHN 1:171-214.

Illustration Sources

Except where noted, the illustrations

have been drawn for this edition by Michael

Lyon (ML), Tyler Moulton (TM), and Glen

Cooper (GC).

Figure 1. Redrawn (ML) from Stewart

Culin, “Games of the North American

Indians,” Annual Report of the Bureau of

American Ethnology 24 (1902-1903): 214, fig. 291.

Figure 2. Redrawn (ML) from (A) Dora

Jane Hamblin, The Etruscans (New York: Time-Life Books, 1975), 123; (B) Michael

H. Crawford, Roman Republican Coinage,

2 vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press, 1974), 2: pl. XLVII, 4; (C) Cornelius

Vermeule, Numismatic Art in America

(Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 1971), 145, fig.

159.

Figure 3. Redrawn (ML) from Hunan

Provincial Museum: The Han Tomb No. 2 at

Ma Wang Tui, Changsha, 2 vols. (Peking: WenWu, 1973), (A) 1:100, pl. 93.3; (B) 2:

pl. 270; (C) Albert S. Lyons, Medicine, An Illustrated History (New York: Abrams, 1978), 143, fig. 222.

Figure 4. Redrawn (ML) from (A)

Charles Singer, A History of Technology, 10

vols. (Oxford: Oxford University Press,

1954), 1:700, fig. 502; (B) Alexander

Badawy, A History of Egyptian

Architecture, vol. 2 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966), 251, pl. 32.

Figure 5. Redrawn (ML) from (A)

Henri Seyrig, “Antiquites Syriennes,” Syria 15 (1934): pl. XIX; (B) Marie-Madeleine

Gauthier, Highways of the Faith (London: Alpine Fine Arts Collection, 1986), 91, fig.

48. (C) Original English engraving from Edward Lane, An Account of the Manners

and Customs of the Modern Egyptians, 3

vols. in 1 (London: Knight, 1846), 3:65.

Figure 6. Redrawn (ML) from (A)

Heinrich Schäfer, Principles of Egyptian Art (Oxford: Clarendon, 1974), pl. 40; (B)

Mohamed Saleh, The Egyptian Museum

Cairo, Official Catalogue (Mainz: von

Zabern, 1987), pl. 123 (carrying poles

restored); (C) G. Lefebvre, Le Tombeau de

Petosiris (Cairo: Imprimerie de l’Institute français d’archäologie Orientale, 1924), pls.

XXX, XXXIV; (D) G. E. Wright, Biblical

Archaeology (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1957), 203, fig. 146 (the inscription JHU

was widely read as a late Aramaic spelling

of Jahweh while Wright reads it as Judah but still does not explain the equally

surprising use by Jews of this Greek image);

(E) Hugo Gressmann, Texte und Bilder zum

alten Testament (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1927), pl. CXLVI, 363; (F) Erwin Goodenough,

Jewish Symbols in the Greco-Roman

Period, 13 vols. (New York: Pantheon, 1964), 11: illustration 334; (G) H. P.

L’Orange, Studies on the Iconography of

Cosmic Kingship in the Ancient World

(New Rochelle, NY: Caratzas Brothers,

1982), 128, fig. 91; and (H) Christiane

Desroches-Noblecourt, Tutankhamen (New York: Rainbird, 1963), 190, fig. 110.

Figure 7. Redrawn (ML) from (A) Erich

Schmidt, Persepolis, 3 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1953), 1: pl. 78

(heavily restored); (B) ibid., 3: pl. 43B

(tomb of Xerxes); (C) Dieter Planck et al.,

Der Keltenfürst von Hochdorf (Stuttgart: Theiss, 1985), 102, fig. 119: (D) ibid., 97,

fig. 114.

Figure 8. (A) Mathias Ueblacker, Das

Teatro Marittimo in der Villa Hadriana

(Mainz: von Zabern, 1985), redrawn (GC), pl. 50.1; and (B) ibid., redrawn (ML), pl.

53.1, plan 24, 27.

Figure 9. Redrawn (ML) from (A)

Pierre Amiet, Art of the Ancient Near East (New York: Abrams, 1980), pl. 599; (B)

Werner Müller, Die heilige Stadt (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1961), pl. 7a; (C) F. Van der

Meer, Atlas of the Early Christian World

(London: Nelson, 1959), 31, map 39.

Figure 10. William Simpson, “The

Threefold Division of Temples,” Ars

Quatuor Coronatorum 1 (1886-88):

between pages 128 and 129, from a drawing

by the author.

Figure 11. Redrawn (ML) from (A)

L’Orange, Iconography of Cosmic Kingship,

41, fig. 19. Redrawn (TM) from (B) Kurt

Weitzmann, ed., Age of Spirituality

(Princeton: Princeton University Press,

1979), 70. Redrawn (ML) from (C) Seth

Stevenson, Dictionary of Roman Coins (London, 1889), 358; (D) Cornelius

Vermeule, Jewish Relations with the Art of Ancient Greece and Rome (Boston: Museum of Fine Arts, 1981), 80; and (E) T. L.

Donaldson, Ancient Architecture on Greek

and Roman Coins and Medals (Chicago:

Argonaut, 1966), no. 57.

Figure 12. Henry Yule, The Book of Ser

Marco Polo the Venetian, 3rd ed. (London: Murray, 1926), 255, “drawn by Sig. Quinto

Cenni on a design compiled by the Editor

from the description of Marco Polo and later

travelers” (ci); quotation by William

Rubruck in Manuel Komroff, ed.,

Contemporaries of Marco Polo (New York: Liveright, 1928), 59.

Figure 13. (A) Stevenson, Dictionary of

Roman Coins, 245. Redrawn (ML) from (B) Weitzmann, ed., Age of Spirituality, 79.

Figure 14. Slightly restored and

enhanced (ML) from Norman de Garis Davies, Rock Cut Tombs of El Amarna

(London: Archaeological Survey of Egypt,

1908), pl. XXIX, XXX.

Figure 15. Henri Leclerq, “Annone,” in

Fernand Cabrol and Henri Leclercq,

Dictionnaire d’archäologie chrétienne et

de liturgie, 15 vols. (Paris: Letouzey et Ané, 1907), 1:2275-76.

Figure 16. Redrawn (ML) from Trevor

Williams, The Triumph of Invention (New York: Facts on File Publications, 1987),

134.

Figure 17. Redrawn (TM) from (A)

Weitzmann, ed., Age of Spirituality, 55.

Redrawn (ML) from (B) L’Orange,

Iconography of Cosmic Kingship, 177, fig.

126; (C) Weitzmann, ed., Age of Spirituality, 184; (D) ibid., 415.

Document Outline

Foreword

The Arrow, the Hunter, and the State

Tenting, Toll, and Taxing

The Hierocentric State

Sparsiones

The Unsolved Loyalty Problem: Our Western Heritage

Victoriosa Loquacitas: The Rise of Rhetoric and the Decline of Everything Else

How to Have a Quiet Campus, Antique Style

New Light on Scaliger

Three Shrines: Mantic, Sophic, and Sophistic

Paths That Stray: Some Notes on Sophic and Mantic Part 1: Introduction through Proposition 4

Part 2: Proposition 5 and Proposition 6

Part 3: Proposition 7 and Proposition 8

Part 4: Proposition 9 to Conclusion

Illustration Sources

=== END BOOK ===
