=== BEGIN BOOK ===
BOOK_ID: NIBLEY_CW_V16
TITLE: The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, Vol. 16 Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri An Egyptian Endowment
FORMAT: TXT (normalized line endings; HTML entities unescaped)
NOTE: Use this file as the canonical source for retrieval/quoting.
=== END HEADER ===

Jacket design by Shauna Gibby

© 2005 The Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies and Hugh Nibley and Associates, LC

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission in writing from the publisher, Deseret Book Company, P O. Box 30178, Salt Lake City, Utah 84130. This work is not an official publication of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The views expressed herein are the responsibility of the author and do not necessarily represent the position of the Church, of Deseret Book Company, of the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, or of the editors.

DESERET BOOK is a registered trademark of Deseret

Book Company.

Visit us at deseretbook.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Nibley, Hugh, 1910–2005

The message of the Joseph Smith papyri : an Egyptian endowment / Hugh Nibley ; edited by John Gee and

Michael D. Rhodes. — 2nd ed.

p. cm. — (The collected works of Hugh Nibley ; v.

16)

Includes an edition of the Book of breathings,

comprising text and translation of Joseph Smith papyri X and XI, and of Louvre papyrus no. 3284.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 1-59038-539-X (hardbound : alk. paper)

1. Book of breathings. 2. Funeral rites and

ceremonies—Egypt. 3. Cults—Egypt. I. Gee, John.

II. Rhodes, Michael D., 1946- . III. Book of

breathings. English & Egyptian. IV. Title. V. Series: Nibley, Hugh, 1910–2005. Works. 1986. v. 16.

PJ1559.B43N5 2005

289.3’—dc22 2005026112

Printed in the United States of America

Sheridan Books Inc., Ann Arbor, MI

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Contents

Illustrations

Key to Abbreviations

Introduction to the Second Edition

Explanation

Chapter 1. What Manner of

Document?

What the Book of Breathings Is Not

Not the Source of the Book of

Abraham

Not an Ordinary Funeral Text

Not Primarily a Funeral Text

Not a Mere Talisman against Foul

Odors

The Unique Importance of the

Book of Breathings

Its Timing

Its Packaging

Jewish and Christian Ties

Classification of Breathings Texts

Stricker’s Classification

Ties with Abraham?

An Egyptian “Endowment”?

Chapter 2. Reproduction and

Translation of Joseph Smith Papyri

XI and X

Column 1, Lines 1–2

Column 1, Lines 3–4

Column 1, Lines 5–7

Column 1, Lines 8–9

Column 2, Lines 1–4

Column 2, Lines 5–8

Column 2, Lines 9–12

Column 3, Lines 1–3

Column 3, Lines 4–7

Column 3, Lines 8–11

Column 3, Lines 12–13

Column 4, Lines 1–5

Column 4, Lines 6–9

Column 4, Lines 10–13

Chapter 3. Translated Correctly?

What Is a Translation?

How Did Joseph Smith Translate?

What He Meant by a

Translation

Are Gadgets Necessary? The Place

of Intuition

Method versus Results

Chapter 4. A More Complete Text

of the Book of Breathings

Text and Translation of Papyrus

Louvre N. 3284 with Variants

from Joseph Smith Papyri XI

and X

Nature and Purpose of the Book

Purification Rites and Entering

the Temple

The Creation (Resurrection) of

Man

The Garden Story

The Long Road Back

Triumph (Coronation)

The Fearful Passage

Vindication and Triumph

Culmination and Conclusion

Some Controls

Papyrus Louvre N. 3279

Column 1

Column 2

Column 3

Column 4

Conclusion of Papyrus Louvre N.

3279

The Petosiris Inscriptions

The Portal

The Façade of the Foretemple

The Pronaos, or Foretemple

The South Partition

The Herweben Papyri

Commentary Part 1. The Nature

and Purpose of the Book of

Breathings

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 1–7

Commentary: “Book” or “Letter”?

An Intimate Document

Significance of “Breathings”

Breathing “Permit”? Passport,

Identification, Guidebook,

Certificate

The Importance of Knowing

Who Is the Real Author? Isis,

Thoth, the Scribe

Osiris, the First Initiate

Purpose of the Book: A Rebirth and

a Renewing

The Sun on the Horizon as the

Soul in Transition

Joining the Father Re—Union

with the Solar Disk

The ba in Glory

Degrees of Glory

Rebirth by the Heavenly Mother

The Title “God’s Father”

Importance and Secrecy of the

Book

The Book of Breathings Is

Beneficial to Both Living and

Dead

Color Plates

Commentary Part 2. Initiation

Rites and Entering the Temple

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 8–14

Commentary

The Osiris Title: The Candidate as

an Osiris

Mȝʿ-ḫrw, Justified

Purification: The Preface to All

Important Rites

Waters of Passage; the Sun Rising

from the Waters

Waters of Life

Waters of Cleansing

Washing and Clothing

Use of Natron and Incense

Anointing

Moral Cleanliness

Pool and Meadow

Way of Passing through the Waters

Meadows of Rest

Meadows of Grasshoppers

The Ladies Edjo (Wȝḏy.t) and

Nekhbet

The Opening of the Mouth Rite: Its

Purpose and Origin

The Opening of the Mouth Rite

as an Anointing

The Oil of Healing: Reversing the

Blows of Death

Jewish and Christian Parallels

The Number of Blows (7 and 70)

The Members Affected

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 14–

20

Commentary

Purification in the Annex

Entering the Great Hall

Significance of the Two Maats

Recurrent Washings: Declared

Clean

Stone of Truth

Hebrew and Christian Parallels

Stone of Truth as a Foundation

Stone

Stone of Truth as a Stone of

Washing

Green and White: Canonical

Colors

Locating the Duat (Dat)

A Series of Washings?

The Hall of Geb and the Hall of

Shu (Creation Room)

Commentary Part 3. The Creation

(Resurrection) of Man

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 20–

22

Commentary: Dramatic

Presentations in the Temple

Creation of the Earth and Creation

of Man

The Creator Gods

Re Comes Down

Atum Equals Adam?

Ptah the Creator

Amon

The Nšm.t-Bark

Forms of Ritual Solar Ships and

Their Use

Deification of the Ba, Meaning of

Nṯr

The Formula “For Time and

Eternity”

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 23–

26

Commentary: The Enduring of the

Name

Immortality of the Flesh

Eternal Progression

Light and Breath as Glory

Triads in the Book of Breathings

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 26–

29

Commentary: The Ritual Meal

Invocation Offerings

Fruits of the Field

Life-giving Food, the Heavenly

Meal

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 38–

41, 57–58

Commentary: The Awakening

The Rising Sun Awakens All to

Life

The Sleep of Sem and the

Awakening of Adam

The Instructors Arrive

Enter the Lady

Maat as Wife and Mother

Awakening by the Rays of the

Sun

The Temple as an Observatory

The Temple as a Powerhouse

Light Penetrating the Darkness

The Sun-God in the Underworld

Commentary Part 4. The Garden

Story

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 27,

37–38

Commentary: The Garden of

Abundance

Lists of Food Offerings

The Lady in the Garden

The Lady and the Tree

The Noble Ished-Tree and Other

Sacred Trees

The Ritual Garden

The Lady Offers Fruit

Transformations

Adam’s Dominion: The Initiate as

Lord of Plants and Animals

The Sacred Marriage (Hieros

Gamos) in the Garden

Forbidden Fruit

The Serpent

Punishment of the Serpent

The Flaming Sword

Commentary Part 5. The Long

Road Back

Awareness of the Fall: The “Way of

Life” for the Living and the

Dead

Initiation as a Journey

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 29–

33

Commentary: Preparing for the

Journey

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 34–

37

Commentary: The Way Is Open,

Wepwawet

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 41–

43

Commentary: Travel Insurance, the

Gods Cooperate

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 44–

54

Commentary: They Equip Him with

a Viaticum

Guides Are Provided for the

Journey

Protection Is Guaranteed

Every Man a King

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 54–

58

Commentary: Coronation Imagery

The Initiate on the Throne in the

Holy Land

In Full Ceremonial Regalia

Possessor of the Royal Ka

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 59–

61

Commentary

Admission to the Company of the

Gods, the Elect Society

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 62–

65

Commentary

Having All Faculties Restored

Forever

Commentary Part 6. The Fearful

Passage

A Dangerous and Toilsome Road

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 66–

69

Commentary

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 69–

72

Commentary: Dark Passages and

Gates

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 72–

73

Commentary

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 74–

78

Commentary: Sacrifice by the

Living and for the Candidate

Sacrifice as a Substitute Offering

for the Candidate

Initiate’s Narrow Escapes from

Sacrificial Death

The Arrested Sacrifice: Christian

and Jewish Parallels

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 79–

89

Commentary: The Challenge at the

Seven Deadly Gates, The

Negative Confession

Seven Sins and Seven Monsters

The Ritual Combat: Its Various

Forms

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 90–

93

Commentary: Psychostasy: The

Initiate Is Pronounced

Guiltless

Righteousness and Morality

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 93–

97

Commentary: The Initiate Is

Admitted to the Duat

Commentary Part 7. Culmination

and Conclusion

Instructions for Wrapping

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 98–

108

Commentary

The Lake of Khonsu, Osiris as

Sokar

Khonsu

Symbolic Wrappings and Veils

Ritual Embraces

The Last Barrier: The Temple Veils

Seeing the God: The Culmination

of the Mysteries

Description of the Embrace

Words Spoken at the End

The ʿnḫ, Ḏd, and Wȝs Formula

Introduction to the Appendixes

Appendix 1. From the Dead Sea

Scrolls (1QS)

Description of the Rule of the

Community

Return to the Ancient Order

Complete Commitment Required

Preliminary Meeting

Conditions of Admission

Going Over to the Next Phase

Admonition against Backsliding

Instructions to the Guide: The

Creation Motif

The Way Back: A Rigorous and

Dangerous Passage

The Priesthood in Charge

A Sacramental Meal

Rules of Behavior

Preparation for a True Temple

The Temple Represents the Eternal

Order

The Preexistent Plan

Hymn of Creation

The Initiate as Adam

Combat and Tribulation: A Dreary

World

Divine Guidance to a Glorious Goal

Glorified in the Presence of God

Appendix 2. From the Odes of

Solomon

Description of the Text

Nature and Purpose of the Book

Purification Rites

The Creation Motif

The Garden Drama

The Way Back

Tried and Tested

Concluding Rites

Appendix 3. The Pearl

Description of the Text

The Situation

The First Primeval Childhood

The Dangerous Mission

The Fall of Man

Recalled by a Letter

The Road Back

Return to the Heavenly Home

The Mysterious Garment or

Hanging

The Royal Embrace

Parallels in the Manichaean

Kephalaia

Appendix 4. From the Pistis Sophia

Nature of the Text

Purpose of the Writings

Purification Rites

The Creation of Man

The Garden and the Fall

The Road Back

Culminating Ordinances

Appendix 5. Cyril of Jerusalem’s

Lectures on the Ordinances

Nature of the Text

Purpose of the Writing

Purification

The Creation of Man

The Garden

The Way Back

Petition for Admission

Concluding Rites

The Clouded Mirror: Echoes in the

Church Fathers

Appendix 6. From the Gospel of

Philip

Nature of the Text

Purpose of the Work

Purification, the Garden, Hieros

Gamos, and the Fall

The Way Back

Recapitulation of Ordinances

Applied to Adam

Applied to the Initiates

The Substitute (Arrested) Sacrifice

Sacred Embracing

Sacrifice Again

Concerning the Veil

Bibliography

Illustrations

Figures

1 Hugh Nibley with JSP I, 1969

2 J. Virgil Bushman, 1957

3 Sail and ankh

4 Thoth leads initiate

5 Original placement of JSP I, XI, and X

6 JSP XI col. 1

7 JSP XI col. 2

8 JSP X col. 3

9 JSP X col. 4

10 P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 1

11 P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 2

12 P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 3

13 P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 4

14 P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 5

15 P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 6

16 Vignettes from P. Louvre N. 3284

17 P. Louvre N. 3279

18 Petosiris temple/tomb complex

19 Petosiris east wall, Opening of the Mouth

20 Petosiris south wall and sarcophagus

21 Herweben Papyri

22 Map of the next world

23 Harpocrates on solar-bark

24 Hugh Nibley in the pyramid of Unas

25 Re-Horakhty on the horizon

26 Re and Osiris

27 Winged ba over mummy

28 Khonsu coming forth

29 Star map with Orion and Sirius

30 Pyramid of Unas

31 Sarcophagus of Seti I

32 Edfu library lintel

33 Initiate with sail being baptized

34 Fish on a lion couch

35 Coin-operated dispenser

36 Ram-headed vase with atef- crown 37 Baptism of Amenhotep II

38 Pool of ḥsmn

39 Two Ladies of Maat on lintel

40 Wedjat- eyes and pools

41 Wharf and pyramid of Pepy II; sun temple

of Niuserre

42 Cricket on a tomb

43 Cricket under scales

44 Steps in Opening of the Mouth rite

45 Sacrifice of bull

46 Foreleg of bull and adze brought to Seti I

47 Apophis under solar boat

48 Maat- stone of Sheshonq I

49 Sun over a temple pylon and on the

horizon

50 Upraised hands of ka-symbol

51 Goddess with two maat- feathers on

coffin lid

52 Two Maats embracing Ramses III

53 Maat and initiate

54 Osiris on Stone of Truth, with Two Ladies

55 Foot-washing stone

56 Geb bracelet

57 Facsimile 2, Book of Abraham

58 Heavenly cow supported by Shu and eight

gods

59 Lady greets Ptah

60 Pharaoh in sedan chair

61 Pyramidion of Khendjer

62 Ptah the creator on Stone of Truth

63 Pharaoh brings offerings to Khnum and

Ptah

64 Khnum at potter’s wheel

65 Supplicant joins Horakhty

66 Lady in boat, Re-Horakhty

67 Celestial Sokar-ship

68 Depictions of time and eternity

69 Papyrus of Hunefer, Papyrus of Ani

70 Pharaoh raises the djed- pillar

71 Lady before three gods

72 Lady before ka offering table 73 Lady plowing and sowing

74 Deceased worships sun in tree

75 The deceased and his ba go forth from the tomb

76 The deceased and the sleeping sem- priest 77 The sem sleep

78 Maat on papyrus

79 Facsimile 3, Book of Abraham

80 Tomb on mountaintop

81 Sun rising between mountains and pylons

82 Plans of Karnak temple of Ptah

83 Meroe sundial

84 Window of appearances

85 Sunrise between two trees

86 Sun shines on entombed body

87 Eleusis opaion

88 Sun shines on the deceased

89 Basic structure of Egyptian temples

90 Penetration of light into darkness at Abu

Simbel

91 Ritual mace, striking the doorpost 92 Lady in tree gives refreshment

93 Hapy, god of the Nile

94 Starry heavens as embrace of Nut

95 Benu- bird in tree over tomb

96 Ship with scarabs

97 Cat killing the Apep serpent

98 Lady before serpent and spear of Horus

99 Lion-couch scene, Facsimile 1, Book of

Abraham

100 Incompleted eye protected by serpent

101 Thoth presents initiate with the book

102 Thoth and Wepwawet guide the

deceased

103 Two Maats in the Hall of Justice

104 Horus the Behdetite destroying his

enemies

105 Shu supports Nut over Geb

106 Hapy, the Inundation

107 Horis and Anubis guide the deceased

108 Anubis leads the deceased

109 Re and Osiris as falcons before djed-columns

110 Winged disk of Horus the Behdetite

111 Royal title, Red Crown, and Deseret

112 Noonday sun on Metternich Stela

113 Worshipper before ka of Osiris

114 Sons of Horus in council of the gods

115 Spirits performing the hnw- rite

116 Man given possession of his heart

117 Man receives his heart

118 Lion-headed guardian with knife

protecting prince

119 Parade of gods on the fourteen steps to

the moon

120 Ani and his wife before offering table

121 Deceased turns his back on a chopping

block

122 Deceased escaping from the trap

123 Two faces of Horus and Seth on one

body

124 Ani turns his back on a chopping block

125 Guardians of the seven gates

126 Rw.ty carrying the solar-bark

127 Ba- birds and solar disk on lions

128 Contest with the Apep serpent

129 Serpent on the sand and solar ship

130 Judgment scene of lady before Osiris

131 Deceased led by Aamut to judgment

132 Deceased and wife towing Sokar-ship

133 Sokar-hawk and winged Khepri-beetle

134 Sokar-ship over two thousand years

135 Mummy wrappings and embracing

divinities

136 The royal embrace of pharaoh by the

gods

137 Tutankhamun embraced by Osiris

138 Ka holds infant pharaoh

139 Priest embraced by his ba- bird

140 Re-Horakhty sails over the heavens

141 Seti I worships Re-Horakhty and Osiris

142 Jupiter Heliopolitanus with uplifted

right arm

143 Royal initiation into the divine family 144 Seti I takes the hand of Osiris

145 Ani in the presence of Osiris

146 Amon-Re embraces the pharaoh

147 Osiris as djed-pillar

148 Resurrection and ascension of Christ

Color Plates

1 Joseph Smith Papyrus I

2 Joseph Smith Papyrus XI

3 Joseph Smith Papyri X

4 Joseph Smith Papyrus II

5 Joseph Smith Papyrus III

6 Joseph Smith Papyrus IV

7 Joseph Smith Papyri V and VI

8 Seti I anoints the Osiris standard

9 Seti I unwraps the image of Osiris

10 Birth of the sun

11 Userhat and Lady of the Sycamore

Key to Abbreviations

1QS

Rule of the Community (Manual

of Discipline)

ÄA

Ägyptologische Abhandlungen

AfO

Archiv für Orientforschung

APOT

Robert H. Charles, ed., The

Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of

the Old Testament

ArOr

Archiv Orientální

ASAE

Annales du service des antiquités

de l’Égypte

BAOA Bibliothèque d’archéologie

orientale d’Athènes

BD

Book of the Dead

BE

Bibliothèque égyptologique

BIFAO Bulletin de l’Institut français

d’archéologie orientale

BiOr

Bibliotheca orientalis

BM

British Museum

CdE

Chronique d’Égypte

CT

Coffin Text, as appearing in

Adriaan de Buck, The Egyptian

Coffin Texts

CWHN The Collected Works of Hugh

Nibley

FERE

Fondation égyptologique reine

Élisabeth

IE

Improvement Era

IFAO

Institut français d’archéologie

orientale du Caire

JBL

Journal of Biblical Literature

JEA

Journal of Egyptian Archaeology

JEOL

Jaarbericht van het

Vooraziatisch-Egyptisch

Genootschap (Gezelschap) Ex

oriente lux

JNES

Journal of Near Eastern Studies

JQR

Jewish Quarterly Review

JSP

Joseph Smith Papyrus (Papyri)

MDAIK Mitteilungen des deutschen

archäologischen Instituts—

Abteilung Kairo (also published

under variant title Mitteilungen des

deutschen Instituts für ägyptische

Altertumskunde in Kairo)

MIFAO Mémoires publiés par les

membres de l’Institut français

d’archéologie orientale du Caire

OLZ

Orientalistische

Literaturzeitung

OMRO Oudheidkundige mededeelingen

uit het Rijksmuseum van Oudheden

te Leiden

Or

Orientalia

OTP

James H. Charlesworth, ed., The

Old Testament Pseudepigrapha

P.

Papyrus

PG

J.-P. Migne, ed., Patrologiae

cursus completus: Series graeca,

162 vols. (Paris: Garnier, 1857–

86)

PL

J.-P. Migne, ed., Patrologiae

cursus completus: Series latina,

221 vols. (Paris: Garnier, 1844–

64)

PO René Graffin and François Nau, eds.,

Patrologia orientalis, 48 vols.

(Paris: Librairie de Paris, Firmin-

Didot, 1903–).

PSBA

Proceedings of the Society of

Biblical Archaeology

PT

Pyramid Texts

RdE

Revue d’égyptologie

REHR

Religions en Égypte hellénistique

et romaine: Colloque de

Strasbourg, 16–18 mai 1967

(Paris: Presses Universitaires de

France, 1969)

RHR

Revue de l’histoire des religions

RT

Recueil de travaux relatifs à la

philologie et à l’archéologie

égyptiennes et assyriennes

TB

Babylonian Talmud

UGAÄ Kurt Sethe and Hermann Kees, eds.,

Untersuchungen zur Geschichte und

Altertumskunde Ägyptens, 15 vols.

(Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1896–1939)

Wb

Adolf Erman and Hermann

Grapow, Wörterbuch der

ägyptischen Sprache

ZÄS

Zeitschrift für ägyptische

Sprache und Altertumskunde

ZDMG Zeitschrift der deutschen

morgenländischen Gesellschaft

Introduction to the Second

Edition

The Nature and Purpose of This

Book

When Hugh Nibley first wrote The

Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, he

wrote it for an audience that understood

things both Egyptian and Latter-day Saint. It

was an audience that at the time did not exist.

For the bemused audience that did find the

book, many failed to comprehend it. Many of

Nibley’s readers have supposed that, like

Nibley’s other works, it was designed to be

read straight through and have expressed

frustration at the difficulty of doing so. Only

the first few chapters are designed to be read

in this manner. The rest of the book is a commentary on a particular text, Papyrus

Louvre N. 3284, which Nibley introduced in

his early chapters. If the reader desires to

know a bit more about a particular passage

in the text, he or she should go to the

appropriate place in the commentary.

Other readers have supposed that the book

must be primarily apologetic in nature. If

some sections are apologetic, it is to clear

away some common misconceptions. The

book is mainly an attempt to understand a

specific text: The Book of Breathings Made

by Isis. That text is neither the Book of

Abraham nor the source of the Book of

Abraham, as Nibley himself clearly

demonstrated. Some individuals were under

the delusion that it was, and so Nibley had to

show that it is not. Nibley points out that

others spend time arguing that the Book of

Breathings is not the Book of Abraham but

then spend no time investigating what the document actually is. For Nibley, the Book

of Breathings itself is interesting and

deserves to be investigated for what it is

rather than what it is not, a trap that some

Egyptologists still fall into.

Although the book is a commentary,

Nibley’s treatment is slightly different from

most Egyptological commentaries. The

typical Egyptological commentary focuses

on issues of paleography, grammar, and

vocabulary. Nibley deals with some of those

issues but focuses mainly on what the text

means, for, as he argues in his third chapter,

only when we understand what a text means

can we say that we have actually translated

it.

What We Have Changed

The job of an editor is to make bad authors

look good and to get out of the way of good

authors. Since Hugh Nibley was a very good author and had a great command of the

English language, we need to explain the

numerous changes we have made in this new

edition of Nibley’s 1975 Message of the

Joseph Smith Papyri.

First, we have returned the Egyptian

transliterations to the standard transliteration

system, which Nibley himself normally used.

When Nibley quoted from older writers who

lived before the standard transliteration

came into being (e.g., Brugsch, Chabas, or

de Horrack) or who simply refused to follow

the standard (e.g., Budge), we have inserted,

where necessary, the correct transliteration

in brackets.

Second, we have checked all the citations

in the more than four thousand footnotes. I

myself have checked over half of them. Since

Nibley made his own translations from all

foreign languages except where noted, we

have given him wide latitude in rendering his translations, although we have standardized

spellings and capitalization to accord with

our own style (with the exception of those

quotations originally in English—thus some

inconsistencies in spelling remain). Many of

the citations in the first edition had been

checked in 1972 by Stephen E. Robinson,

then Nibley’s student assistant. The source-

checking process for this edition began in

1988 and went through 1992 and then began

again in 2001. Except for the education it has

given the source checkers, the process of

checking the footnotes has been, for the most

part, unnecessary. Analysis of a random

chapter showed that of its almost seven

hundred citations, Nibley was completely

accurate 94 percent of the time, and in more

than half of these remaining forty cases, one

could explain the problem as a typographical

error. Nibley is more accurate than most

Egyptologists whose footnotes I have checked, and several times I have been

amazed at how his translations of passages

have correctly interpreted the grammar of

Egyptian while the standard Egyptological

translations have not. In this edition, as in

other editions of the Collected Works of

Hugh Nibley, notes have been expanded to

include full bibliographic information, and

abbreviations have been either expanded or

standardized and are given in the list of

abbreviations. The content has also been

checked and adjusted if necessary. Despite

our best efforts, there may still be mistakes,

and in the end Nibley is responsible for his

own footnotes, but readers should expect to

find that the source is where Nibley says it is

and that it says what he said it said.

Third, nearly all the illustrations have

been either redrawn or new photographs

provided. In the original edition, the artwork

was done by Hugh Nibley, his young daughter Martha, and another illustrator,

whose name we have been unable to

discover. While checking the sources of the

artwork has caused some of us to marvel at

Nibley’s artistic ability to stitch together

accurately freehand illustrations of scenes

split between separate photographic plates

in disparate locations of a printed volume,

we have decided to replace the illustrations

in the interests of consistency, clarity, and

accuracy. The illustrations have been

supervised by Michael P. Lyon, who has

spared no effort in their preparation.

Fourth, early in the editing process, we

discovered many pages of Nibley’s draft

manuscript containing significant portions of

text or notes that Nibley had deleted. These

deletions have been restored to their proper

place except where the editors agreed that

Nibley had good reason for dropping the text

(in most cases because the passage had been moved elsewhere). The new material has

received the same level of source checking

and editing as the rest of the work.

Fifth, the greatest changes occur in the

second chapter, where typesetting

considerations have led us to abandon

Nibley’s original interlinear presentation.

Originally, Nibley presented the papyrus in

interlinear translation in part because of

accusations that he could not read Egyptian.

Nibley wanted to allow the reader to look

over his shoulder and follow the entire

process. Since there is no longer any

question that Nibley could read Egyptian (I

visited him shortly before his death and

watched him read Egyptian and half a dozen

other languages, at sight), there seemed to be

little reason to use the interlinear approach.

The new presentation should be both easier

to follow and clearer than the old.

Throughout the changes, we have tried to remain true to Nibley’s intent, sometimes

preserving Nibley’s readings of the

ambiguous hieratic even though we might

have preferred to resolve the ambiguity

differently. 1

Sixth, Nibley’s descriptive entries in the

table of contents were incorporated as

headings into the text to allow the reader to

follow his thematic organization.

What we as editors have not done, except

in rare cases in footnotes, is to update

Nibley. To do so would have been to make

the work the editors’ rather than Nibley’s.

What Has Changed in the Field

It is fair, however, to alert the reader to the

major changes in the field since the first

edition appeared in 1975. When Nibley

published his work on the Joseph Smith

Papyri, comparatively few contemporary

Egyptian religious texts had been published.

Since that time, more than a thousand Greco-

Roman period Egyptian religious texts have

been published, and hundreds of Greco-

Roman period Egyptian religious texts have

been reinterpreted. A true second edition

would take this material into account, but it

would be an almost unrecognizably different

book, and it would not be Nibley’s. Nibley

used most of the contemporary Egyptian

religious texts available to him, but he relied

heavily on an approach to Egyptian religion

that flattens the subject chronologically and

geographically. Thus the Pyramid Texts are

used to elucidate texts from two and a half

millennia later. Nibley’s approach to the

subject was and is common among most

Egyptologists, even though a more

chronologically and geographically refined

approach might have some advantages.

Four major developments in the study of

the Joseph Smith Papyri have occurred since Nibley published the first edition: (1) It is

now known that the person who identified

the papyri as having red ink was Oliver

Cowdery rather than Joseph Smith, and he

may have been referring to a different

papyrus than the one Nibley thought he was.

Still, there is no reason to assume that

Papyrus Joseph Smith I + XI + X is the

source of the Book of Abraham. The Church

of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has had

no official position on the issue, and most

members of the church do not believe that it

is. The Egyptologists are adamant that it is

not, and so everyone seems to be in

agreement on that issue. (2) Important studies

of the various types of Books of Breathings

indicate that the version in the Joseph Smith

Papyri is a copy of the Book of Breathings

Made by Isis, which is only one of several

different types of Books of Breathings. 2

Nibley used the older terminology for the various Books of Breathings, which we have

not updated. (3) Further research into the

family of the owners of the Joseph Smith

Papyri seems to indicate no connection with

the Soter family and a different relationship

to other owners of the Book of Breathings

Made by Isis than the vague ones posited by

Nibley. 3 (4) In connection with the work on the family of the owners of the papyri, the

Joseph Smith Papyri are now dated about

three hundred years earlier than supposed by

Nibley. 4 In some cases we have altered Nibley’s text slightly to allow for the earlier

possibility, although we have kept his dating

arguments as they were.

In all of this, Nibley was asking the right

questions and answering both to the best of

his ability and to the best of anyone’s ability

at that time. Although we can provide better

answers now, Nibley did a respectable job

at the time. Nibley’s period piece remains a treasure trove of useful information and

insights.

What Nibley Got Right

It is also useful to know that Nibley was

ahead of his time on some Egyptological

subjects. Nibley’s long work with

comparative religion sensitized him to

recognize certain ritual patterns, and thus he

saw in the Book of Breathings an initiation

text at a time when the only Egyptologists

who thought that initiation existed in ancient

Egypt were Walter Federn, Claas Bleeker,

and Gertrud Thausing, 5 who were definitely on the margins of the discipline. Since that

time, the topic of initiation has become

mainstream in the discipline, 6 although some Egyptologists still dislike the term and the

subject.

Another subject on which Nibley stood at

the forefront was his realization that the so-called funerary texts were not necessarily

funerary but were used by the living. This

point has also become mainstream. 7 Not only have the so-called funerary texts been found

in nonfunerary contexts, but almost all of the

so-called funerary equipment has been found

in context of use by the living. 8 It is increasingly clear to a number of

Egyptologists that there is no separate

Egyptian funerary religion and that little if

anything is gained by attaching the label

“funerary” to a text, object, or practice.

Nibley’s work presupposes such a stance.

Acknowledgments

This edition would not have been possible

without the aid of many people. Angela

Clyde Barrionuevo, Naomi Gunnels, Paula

Hicken, Shirley Ricks, Linda Sheffield,

Amanda Smith, Sandra Thorne, and

Elizabeth Watkins helped me check the sources. Lyle Fletcher scanned the original

text into the computer. Fran Clark Hafen set

the early electronic version on a good

footing. James Tredway recovered portions

of early manuscript drafts. Jacob Rawlins

typeset the text and provided numerous

creative solutions to many of the typesetting

challenges. Michael Lyon crafted the

illustrations from the ground up, and Julie

Dozier, Jennifer Messick, and Paula Hicken

worked on obtaining permissions to use

those illustrations. Michael Rhodes cast a

second eye on all the editorial work.

Elizabeth Watkins helped bring consistency

to the myriad details in the book, Larry

Morris shared in the editorial tasks, and

Shirley Ricks shepherded an endless host of

tricky technical details through the editing

process. Alison Coutts oversaw the whole

process and lent her competence to all

manner of small details, most especially the indexes. Finally, I would like to thank Hugh

Nibley for writing this book, which launched

me into my own study of ancient Egypt in the

first place. I hope my editorial work on this

volume can partially repay the debt.

John Gee

22 August 2005

Provo, Utah

Notes

1. Since one of the editors has published his own version, the interested reader can compare the readings in Michael Rhodes, The Hor Book of Breathings: A Translation and Commentary, Studies in the Book of Abraham 2

(Provo, Utah: FARMS, 2002).

2. Marc Coenen, “Books of Breathings: More Than a Terminological Question,” Orientalia Lovaniensia Periodica 26 (1995): 29–38; and Marc Coenen, “An Introduction to the Document of Breathing Made by Isis, “ RdE 1/9 (1998): 37–45.

3. L. Kákosy, “The Soter Tomb in Thebes,” in Hundred-Gated Thebes, ed. S. P. Vleeming (Leiden: Brill, 1995), 61–67; K. Van Landuyt, “The Soter Family: Genealogy

and Onomastics,” in Hundred-Gated Thebes, 69–82; François R. Herbin, Padiimenipet fils de Sôter (Paris: Musée du Louvre, 2002).

4. Marc Coenen, “The Dating of the Papyri Joseph Smith I, X and XI and Min Who Massacres His Enemies,” in

Egyptian Religion: The Last Thousand Years (Leuven: Peeters, 1998), 2:1103–15.

5. Walter Federn, “The ‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts: A New Approach,” JNES 19/4 (1960): 241–57; Claas J. Bleeker, “Initiation in Ancient Egypt,” in Initiation, ed. C. J. Bleeker (Leiden: Brill, 1965), 49–58; Gertrud Thausing and Traudl Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch (Kairo: Österreichisches Kulturinstitut Cairo, 1969); Gerturd Thausing, Sein und Werden: Versuch einer Ganzheitsschau der Religion des Pharaonenreiches (Vienna: Institut für Völkerkunde der Universität Wien, 1971).

6. Reinhard Grieshammer, “Zum ‘Sitz im Leben’ des negativen Sündenbekenntnisses,” in XVIII. Deutscher Orientalistentag (Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1974), 19–25; Reinhold Merkelbach, “Ein ägyptischer Priestereid,”

Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 2 (1968): 7–30; Ludwig Koenen, “Die Unschuldsbeteuerungen des Priestereides und die römische Elegie,” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 2 (1968): 31–38; Edward F. Wente, “Mysticism in Pharaonic Egypt?” JNES 41/3

(1982): 161–79; Jan Assmann, “Death and Initiation in the Funerary Religion of Ancient Egypt,” in Religion

and Philosophy in Ancient Egypt (New Haven: Yale Egyptological Seminar, 1989), 135–59; Jean-Marie

Kruchten, Les annales des prêtres de Karnak (XXI–

XXIIImes dynasties) et autres textes contemporains relatifs à l’initiation des prêters d’Amon (Leuven: Departement Oriëntalistiek, 1989); Robert K. Ritner, The Mechanics of Ancient Egyptian Magical Practice (Chicago: Oriental Institute, 1993), 150 n. 678; John Gee,

“The Requirements of Ritual Purity” (PhD diss., Yale University, 1998), 51–311; Jan Assmann, Altägyptische Totenliturgien. Band 1: Totenliturgien in den

Sargtexten des Mittleren Reiches (Heidelberg: Winter, 2002), 322–24; John Gee, “Prophets, Initiation and the Egyptian Temple,” Journal for the Society for the Study of Egyptian Antiquities 31 (2004): 97–107.

7. Grieshammer, “Zum ‘Sitz im Leben’ des negativen Sündenbekentnisses,” 19–25; Mordechai Gilula,

“Hirtengeschichte 17–22 = CT VII 36m-r,” Göttinger Miszellen 29 (1978): 21–22; Wente, “Mysticism in Pharaonic Egypt?” 161–79; Ritner, Mechanics of Ancient Egyptian Magical Practice, 62–64; Stephen Quirke, The Cult of Ra: Sun Worship in Ancient Egypt (London: Thames and Hudson, 2001), 54–58.

8. Geraldine Pinch, “Redefining Funerary Objects,” in Egyptology at the Dawn of the Twenty-first Century, 3 vols. (Cairo: The American University of Cairo Press, 2003), 2:443–47.

Explanation

This book had to be written because a

great fuss was being made about a scrap of

papyrus (fig. 1). Some people were

endlessly dinning into the ears of the public

that what was written on that small and

battered strip proved beyond a doubt that

Joseph Smith was a fraud because he thought

that it contained the Book of Abraham,

whereas it contains nothing of the sort. But

who said he thought so? They did. Though

they were unable to furnish any statement

from the Prophet to that effect, they assumed

it must be so because somebody in Kirtland

tried to connect the two documents. (But if

the overzealous brethren who made this

attempt thought they could show that they were smarter than Joseph—and that was

their idea—they were quickly disabused,

and the project was dropped before it got

beyond the second line of hieratic

characters.) The doughty crusaders against

the authenticity of the Book of Abraham, who

wanted to pin the whole thing on Joseph

Smith without making any serious attempt to

look into the matter, often protested that they

were animated by one motive only: an

unqualified and overmastering love of truth.

Yet, strangely, their impassioned project

never got beyond the purely negative point of

proclaiming the fraudulence of the Book of

Abraham and its author. None of them could

care less about what the papyrus in question

had to offer in its own right—and it is, in

fact, a most singular document. It was the

Latter-day Saints who kept asking, day after

day: What does the thing actually say?

Figure 1. Hugh Nibley examines a photograph of

Joseph Smith Papyrus I, surrounded by his note cards and manual typewriter, December 1969.

They have a right to know, but who can

tell them? The student of Greek begins his

career firm in the knowledge that en archē

ēn ho logos means, “In the beginning was the word” (John 1:1); so much for the

translation, but where has it gotten us? Dr.

Faustus wore himself out trying to explain

that verse and finally gave up. 1 And the Book of Breathings is quite as enigmatic as the

Gospels. The reader perusing the translation

of it in chapter 2 below may well wonder if

someone isn’t pulling his leg. But if he broods over the text he may soon begin to

sense that something strange is going on and

seem to hear the ringing of familiar bells.

This suggests that he look a little farther and

expand the field of his reading. First of all,

he will find that our little Book of Breathings

does not stand alone; there are three classes

of Breathings books, all of which cast light

on the Joseph Smith version—which

happens to belong to class 2, by far the most

important of the lot. But the Books of

Breathings of that class are extremely limited

in the time and place of their production

(making it relatively easy to place any one of

them); if the items in them that pique

Mormon curiosity are not mere

coincidences, we must look farther. So we

go back in time and are soon simply

swamped by Egyptian writings containing

the now familiar motifs. From these we have

included, in chapter 4 of this book, a text four hundred years older than the Joseph

Smith Papyrus, and another a good thousand

years older than that one, as examples in

which the same rites and ordinances are both

unusually well preserved and presented in

the same order as in the Book of Breathings.

The exercise can be carried back to the

Pyramid Texts, the oldest large body of

religious writings to survive. This large and

disorganized collection does not allow for a

neat overall comparison, but all the main

themes are there—and no others—indicating

that the story begins as it ends, with the same

plot and characters. If we take all the topic

headings assigned to the various Pyramid

Texts by Raymond Faulkner in 1969, we find

that they fall readily and completely into six

main categories: namely, (1) the importance

of a primordial written document on which

the rites are based; (2) purification

(including anointing, lustration, and clothing texts); (3) creation (the common resurrection

and awakening texts); (4) garden (including

tree and ritual-meal motifs); (5) travel

(protection, “ferryman,” combat, and Osirian

texts); and (6) what Faulkner calls

“ascension” texts (including victory,

coronation, admission to the heavenly

company, and Horus texts). 2 These six themes are basic to the mysteries

everywhere.

But the system which begins with the

Pyramid Texts or earlier does not culminate

in the Book of Breathings; we must look

forward as well as backward in time and, in

so doing, discover that our Book of

Breathings stands squarely on the dividing

line between the old Egyptian religion and

the early Judeo-Christian teachings and

practices which retain so much of the

Egyptian tradition. In the appendixes of this

handbook, the reader will find half a dozen such writings, selected from hundreds, which

demonstrate how consistently the scenario of

the Book of Breathings was carried forward

in time, clear traces of it surviving in the

rites and customs of many religious groups to

this day.

Latter-day Saints believe that their temple

ordinances are as old as the human race and

represent a primordial revealed religion that

has passed through alternate phases of

apostasy and restoration which have left the

world littered with the scattered fragments of

the original structure, some more and some

less recognizable, but all badly damaged and

out of proper context. The early fathers of the

church gave such an explanation for the

disturbingly close resemblances between

Christianity and other, notably Egyptian,

beliefs and practices—all are the remnants

of another age. Beginning in the twentieth

century, an army of scholars, following the

lead of Sir James Frazer, has been diligently

at work, first collecting thousands of

scattered pieces of earlier customs and

folktales and then trying to put them together,

like the pieces of jigsaw puzzles, to see

whether they all come from a few basic

systems or even go back to a single, all-

embracing “pattern.” Whatever the end result

may be, it is perfectly clear by now that the

same sort of thing has been going on for a very long time and in virtually all parts of

the world.

Figure 2. Tom Kuyayashva, 93 years old, and J. Virgil Bushman, 21 April 1957, Hotevilla, Arizona.

Offhand, one may say that Joseph Smith

could have gotten his ideas from any or many

of a great number of sources, ancient and

modern. Here is an illustration. On Easter

Day in 1954 at about noon, I was standing

with Brother J. Virgil Bushman (1889–1969,

fig. 2), that doughty missionary to the Hopis,

before the house of the celebrated

Tewaqueptewa in Old Oraibi, when a small

delegation of leading men from the village

came up and informed us that they had just

learned from the local Protestant

missionaries how the Mormons got a lot of

their stuff. It seems that when the famous

chief Tuba (1810–87) became a Mormon,

Jacob Hamblin took him to Salt Lake City to

marry his wives in the temple there.3 While the chief was in town, Joseph Smith (1805–

44)—none other—took him aside and

interrogated him very closely, prying the tribal secrets out of him; from what Chief

Tuba told Smith, he proceeded to write the

Book of Mormon, establish the temple

ordinances, and found the church. And that,

sir, is why the Hopi traditions are so much

like those of the Mormons. 4

The point is, that would be quite a

plausible explanation had the two men been

contemporaries or had either ever been in

Salt Lake; Joseph Smith just might have

gotten his knowledge that way. There are, in

fact, countless tribes, sects, societies, and

orders from which he might have picked up

this and that, had he known of their

existence. The Near East in particular is

littered with the archaeological and living

survivals of practices and teachings which

an observant Mormon may find suggestively

familiar. The Druzes would have been a gold

mine for Smith. He has actually been charged

with plundering some of the baggage brought to the West by certain fraternal orders during

the Middle Ages—as if the Prophet must

rummage in a magpie’s nest to stock a king’s

treasury! Among the customs and religions of

mankind there are countless parallels, many

of them very instructive, to what the

Mormons do. But there is a world of

difference between Ginzberg’s Legends of

the Jews and the book of Isaiah, or between the Infancy Gospels and the real Gospels, no

matter how many points of contact one may

detect between them. The Latter-day Saint

endowment was not built up of elements

brought together by chance, custom, or long

research; it is a single, perfectly consistent,

organic whole, conveying its message

without the aid of rationalizing,

spiritualizing, allegorizing, or moralizing

interpretations.

But what about the Egyptian rites? What

are they to us? They are a parody, an imitation, but, as such, not to be despised.

For all the great age and consistency of their

rites and teachings, which certainly

command respect, the Egyptians did not have

the real thing, and they knew it. They were,

as I. E. S. Edwards puts it, like “a people

searching in the dark for a key to truth and,

having found not one but many keys…

retaining all lest perchance the appropriate

one should be discarded.” 5 Or, in the words of Abraham, “Pharaoh, being a righteous

man,” was ever “seeking earnestly to imitate

that order established by the fathers in the

first generations, in the days of the first

patriarchal reign” (Abraham 1:26), for he

“would fain claim [the priesthood]”

(Abraham 1:27). If the Egyptian endowment

was but an imitation, it was still a good one,

and we may be able to learn much from it,

just as we may learn much about the early

church from the vagaries of the gnostics. But it is not for a moment to be equated with the

true and celestial order of things.

Thinkers calling themselves modern affect

to see in rites and ordinances purportedly

going back to the days of Adam a horrid

antithesis to all that dynamic, progressive

thinking which is the hallmark of the modern

emancipated intellect. Yet the ancient picture

is anything but static. In the Egyptian rites

everything is in motion; the Egyptians

respect the Heisenberg principle, for they

never try to make any two temples, tombs,

texts, vignettes, or reliefs exactly alike. It is

the modern world that mass-produces on

fixed and static patterns. Every system, no

matter how dynamic, must have certain

unchanging constants to give it structure:

with Einstein, it was the speed of light; with

the Egyptians, it was the unchanging identity

of the individual. Life was an endless series

of exciting episodes through which the individual passes, undergoing many changes

to match every changing environment; but he

never loses his identity. It is our modern,

dynamic faith that binds the individual to a

single stereotype and gives him only one life,

chopped off at both ends as neatly as a piece

of dough in an ITT bakery. 6 In the more exalted realms of higher thought, however,

modern thinking moves steadily closer to the

Egyptians. For, just as it is not possible for

us to visualize the incredible forces and

particles of a universe describable only in

terms of mathematics, so the Egyptians

wisely did not attempt to visualize the

ultimate but stuck to models to explain

themselves. The whole Egyptian ritual cycle

is figurative: “Behold, all things have their

likeness” was their motto, “both things

which are temporal, and things which are

spiritual; things which are in the heavens

above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things

which are under the earth, both above and

beneath: all things bear record of me”

(Moses 6:63). Everything can be described,

when necessary, in terms of something else

—but never in the absolute, for “all truth is

independent in that sphere in which God has

placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence

also; otherwise there is no existence” (D&C

93:30).

The Mormon endowment, like the

Egyptian, is frankly a model, a presentation

in figurative terms. As such, it is flexible and

adjustable; for example, it may be presented

in more languages than one and in more than

one medium of communication. But since it

does not attempt to be a picture of reality, but

only a model or analogue to show how things

work, setting forth the pattern of man’s life

on earth with its fundamental whys and

wherefores, it does not need to be changed or adapted greatly through the years; it is a

remarkably stable model, which makes its

comparison with other forms and traditions,

including the more ancient ones, quite valid

and instructive. It is not the purpose of this

book to make the Latter-day Saint temple

endowment more “meaningful” to the reader

—nothing could do that. Those who have

been to the temple hundreds of times know

that “age cannot wither … nor custom stale

[its] infinite variety.” 7 What these few bits of added information do is to supply a new

dimension to the experience, along with the

assurance that a wealth of newly found

records confirms the fundamental thesis of

its antiquity and genuineness.

At present, a large and steadily growing

number of Egyptologists are laying

increasing emphasis on the importance of the

initiation motif in the ritual texts of the

Egyptians, hitherto held to be exclusively funerary in nature. Many Egyptologists may

protest that the compiler of this book has

been partial to that school, and he pleads

guilty; the idea that the Book of Breathings is

a temple text is borrowed from scholars

whose authority is at least equal to that of the

opposing faction and whose position

becomes stronger every day. But here we run

into a strange impasse indeed. For it turns

out by the nature of things that the most

eminent Egyptologists cannot qualify either

to question or to test our thesis. The whole

purpose of this book is to compare two

scenarios, the Egyptian and the Mormon; but

the writer has been careful throughout to

describe and discuss only one of them,

preserving complete silence on the other.

Though often sorely tempted to point out

some really stunning parallels between the

two disciplines, he has been restrained both

by the admonition of the prophets and the consideration that what is glaringly obvious

to him hardly needs to be called to the

attention of any adult practicing Latter-day

Saint, while to take up and discuss such

matters with outsiders would only perplex

and confuse them. Thus, our learned critic

finds himself in the position of a one-armed

violinist, while the writer claims impudent

immunity from attack.

But in spite of the latter’s shortcomings,

there is really nothing much to argue about,

since his opinions are quite worthless. The

purpose of a commentary is not to gratify the

reader with the opinions of someone with a

degree (running to the concordances for a

“doctrinal” type of commentary), but to

provide him with information to help make

up his own mind and to remind him that all

has not yet been said on a particular subject.

Of course, the maker of a commentary is

bound to supply some evidence that the information he imparts is not of his own

invention—hence the perpetual appeal to the

opinions and observations of others and the

bothersome business of bibliography.

Actually, the documentation of the book is

minimal, our purpose being not to prove a

case but to state one, confining comments to

well-known themes and confirming

plausibility from the most readily available

sources and studies.

Notes

1. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust 1210–37.

2. Raymond O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969).

3. [The Salt Lake Temple was completed in 1893—eds.]

4. [For more information on Nibley’s dealings with the Hopis, see “The Home Dance: Hugh Nibley among the

Hopis,” in Boyd J. Petersen, Hugh Nibley: A

Consecrated Life (Salt Lake City: Kofford Books, 2002), 276–87—eds.]

5. I. E. S. Edwards, The Pyramids of Egypt, 3rd ed.

(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1985), 15.

6. [ITT stands for International Telephone and Telegraph.

The bakery still exists in Provo, Utah, under the name of IBC Baking Company—eds.]

7. William Shakespeare, Antony and Cleopatra 2.2.

Chapter 1

What Manner of Document?

What the Book of Breathings Is

Not

Not the Source of the Book of

Abraham

Under a reproduction of the first column of

the Joseph Smith manuscript of the Book of

Breathings (usually designated as JSP XI)

appearing in the journal Dialogue, two eager investigators published the simple and

damning statement: “Joseph Smith used this

as the basis for the Book of Abraham. ”1 This is impressively direct and uncompromising

but also stimulating to the critical mind:

Joseph Smith used it? How did he use it?

That is, or should be, the first question

occurring to anyone whose wondering eye compares two damaged lines of hieratic

writing (only eighteen characters in all) with

the five teeming chapters of the Book of

Abraham. How would anyone go about

employing those eighteen characters as the

“basis” for that remarkable book? What does

“basis” mean anyhow? The authors have

insisted loud and long that they know exactly

how Joseph Smith did the trick, 2 and yet they have never had the good grace to tell the

public how he did it—it remains a secret

locked in their own bosoms.

How easily the best of scholars may fall

into such a trap appears from the title of

Professor Klaus Baer’s indispensable study

subtitled “A Translation of the Apparent

Source of the Book of Abraham.” 3 There would be nothing wrong with Baer’s subtitle

if he had been good enough to explain to his

readers why it is apparent to him that this

text is the source of the Book of Abraham.

Yet aside from the heavily loaded title itself,

he never mentions the issue that he has raised

and that, indeed, was bound to become the

main interest of his article. Neither he nor

his fellow polemicists have bothered to ask

the most obvious and unavoidable questions

their accusation raises: How on earth could

Joseph Smith or anybody else have derived a

condensed and detailed account of fifty

pages from fewer than twenty hieratic signs?

How could such signs have suggested a

history, let alone contain it? Why must a

hard-working author derive his whole book

from fewer than two dozen signs when

thousands were at his disposal?

The usual questions about the papyri may

be easily gotten out of the way:

Is the Book of Abraham a correct

translation of Joseph Smith Papyri XI and X?

No, the Book of Breathings is not the Book

of Abraham!

Does it pretend to be? No, it was never

put forward as such. The facsimiles were

published, along with explanations of what

they depicted, but at no time was any

Egyptian text put forward as the original of

the Book of Abraham.

But didn’t Joseph Smith think he was

translating the Book of Abraham from those

papyri? I am not a mind reader, but it is hard

to see how Joseph Smith could have thought

he was deriving the book from such an

impossible source; after all, he knew where it came from, because he produced it. He

might have wanted to fool people into

thinking that he had translated it from these

particular papyri, but if so, why did he never

put forth such a proposition?

Doesn’t the text of the Book of Abraham

appear in a number of manuscripts in

columns running parallel with characters

from the Book of Breathings? Yes, the texts were paired when the brethren at Kirtland

were invited to try their skill at translation.

In 1835 the Prophet’s associates, miffed by

his superior knowledge and determined to

show him up, made determined efforts to

match up the finished text of the Book of

Abraham with characters from Joseph Smith

Papyrus XI. But they never got beyond the

second line of characters— if they were

really trying to translate, they soon

demonstrated that it simply didn’t work.

When at that very time they turned savagely

against Joseph Smith and told every

scandalous thing they could invent about him,

none of them ever made mention of his

involvement in any of these frustrated

exercises.4

Whatever exercises, discreet or indiscreet,

the brethren in Kirtland may have engaged

in, the Prophet Joseph himself has supplied

us with the most conclusive evidence that the manuscript today identified as the Book of

Breathings, Joseph Smith Papyri XI and X,

was not, in his opinion, the source of the Book of Abraham. For he has furnished a

clear and specific description of the latter:

“The record of Abraham and Joseph, found

with the mummies, is [l] beautifully written

on papyrus, with black, and [2] a small part

red, ink or paint, [3] in perfect

preservation.” 5 Consider the three points in order.

First, the Abraham document was

beautifully written, and some of the

surviving Joseph Smith Papyri are indeed

nicely and clearly written and accompanied

by well-drawn vignettes (see color plates 1–

7). Such are fragments II through VIII as

classified in the Improvement Era

reproductions.6 If the Book of Breathings text was the only manuscript Joseph possessed, it

is just possible that the thrill of having such a treasure could have carried him away to the

extent of regarding it as a thing of beauty. But

he had a sizable collection of handsome

Egyptian documents, compared with which

the hastily written and clumsily retouched

characters of the Breathings text, in their

crowded and uneven lines, can by no stretch

of the imagination be called beautifully

written. Even the reserved Professor John

Wilson, while noting that some of the Joseph

Smith Papyri were rather prettily written,

comments on the coarse appearance of XI

and X, the Book of Breathings.7

In the second place, the text which Joseph

Smith relates, directly or indirectly, to

Abraham contained the rubrics, or brief

notations in red ink, common to Egyptian

manuscripts. He is plainly describing a real

manuscript and a rather typical one; and

since no one could read it, there is no reason

why he should not have described it correctly. Hence the fact that there is not the

slightest indication of rubrics in Joseph

Smith Papyri XI and X—not so much as a

speck of red ink, though such rubrics are

common in the other Joseph Smith

manuscripts—is alone enough to disqualify it

as a candidate for the Abraham source. This

is no mistake of preservation, moreover, for

the longest of all Books of Breathings (one

closely associated, as we shall see, with this

one) is also free of rubrics—apparently an

intentional omission.8

Third, “the record of Abraham and

Joseph” was in a state of “perfect

preservation,” while the Book of Breathings

is the most badly damaged of all the Joseph

Smith Papyri. That it was already damaged

in Joseph Smith’s day is indicated by a

number of things. For example, four large

pieces are missing; they are not parts

destroyed by the process of minute and gradual flaking, which is still going on and

which leaves marks on the glue of the

mounting paper, but chunks containing

sizable portions of several lines each, such

as could have broken off only before the

document was mounted. If they had broken

off after the mounting, why were not the

precious pieces returned to their proper

place? Instead of that, they were used to fill

in gaps in another damaged document,

Joseph Smith Papyrus IV, three of them being

glued in upside down! Obviously, they were

not recognized as parts of our Breathings

text. Yet the paper on which the latter was

mounted bears the handwriting of Joseph

Smith, and the drawings, maps, and texts on

the backs of the mounting papers of all the

surviving papyri clearly indicate that the

work was done in Kirtland, where Wilford

Woodruff reports in 1836 that the papyri

were on display in the temple as its greatest treasure. 9 How could anyone fail to identify the four broken-off pieces unless they were

already broken off and jumbled up at the

time the document was found? The damage

could have been done during Michael

Chandler’s frantic search for “diamonds or

valuable metal” in the New York customs

house. 10 A study of the mounted manuscripts shows that there are places where bits of

papyrus fibers have flaked off, leaving either

filaments of fiber or the imprint of such in

the glue, while there are other gaps in the

manuscript where the backing paper has

always been blank, with no papyrus glued to

it, showing that these parts of the text were

missing at the time of mounting.

When in 1835 the brethren made attempts

to “translate” the first two lines in terms of

the Book of Abraham (if that is what they

were doing, though it is exceedingly

doubtful), they had the characters copied out for them by a single scribe in a bold and

rather skillful hand, thus sparing wear and

tear on the original; it is significant that when

this scribe comes to those places in the

manuscript which are today a blank, he also

leaves a blank in his copy, which has been

filled in by another hand with thin and

awkward characters which are far too many

for the spaces indicated and definitely the

wrong characters. This is another indication

that the text was damaged from the first.

Indeed, unlike the other Joseph Smith Papyri,

this one contains clumsy ancient retouching

over places where the papyrus fiber flaked

off centuries ago. In short, if any of the

papyri is not in a state of “perfect

preservation,” the Book of Breathings is it.

Then too, it is significant that in his

description of the Abraham text, Joseph

Smith fails to mention what would have been

the most striking thing about it had it been the same as the Book of Breathings—namely, the

full-page drawing immediately adjoining the

text. Since this is an illustration to the Book

of Abraham, it has naturally been assumed

that the text that follows the drawing could

only be that of the Book of Abraham—even

the brethren at Kirtland assumed that. But

that fails to take into account the common

Egyptian practice of matching vignettes with

texts in general and with Book of Breathings

texts in particular. In his edition of the Book

of Breathings based on Papyrus Louvre N.

3279, Jean-Claude Goyon warns the student

that the vignettes that accompany the text

“have often only a very remote connection

with the substance ( le développement) of the writing” (cf. p. 77, fig. 16). 11 For example, illustration 2 of this Breathings text actually

belongs “to the illustrations of the Chapters

of the Gates of Hades, in the Book of the

Dead, ” and it is only “as an exception” that

“the title of the text [under illustration 4]

corresponds to the drawing that adorns” it.12

Following a well-known Egyptian

practice (most conspicuous in the Amduat),

the Book of Abraham twice refers its reader

back to an illustration of some ritual object it

is talking about. When we read, “And that

you may have a knowledge of this altar, I

will refer you to the representation at the

commencement of this record” (Abraham

1:12), or “That you may have an

understanding of these gods, I have given you

the fashion of them in the figures at the

beginning” (Abraham 1:14), the language

clearly implies that the reader does not have

the picture before him, but must be referred

back to “the commencement of this record,”

to “the figures at the beginning.” Abraham’s

text may have belonged on the same roll as

the Book of Breathings and Facsimile 1, or it

may have been placed differently in the original document composed by Abraham,

but if so, it must in either case be sought in

the section that has obviously been cut off

from the Book of Breathings.

For a demonstration of the strange practice

of putting the illustrations to one story with

the text of another, we need look no further

than the Joseph Smith Book of Breathings

itself, where the scene depicted so vividly in

the facsimile is nowhere mentioned in the

text that immediately follows. Only by

matching up the fibers of the writing and the

drawing is it possible to show that the two

presentations, which at first glance have

nothing to do with each other, were actually

side by side on the same strip of papyrus.13

Since Joseph Smith actually possessed

quite a number of perfectly preserved,

beautifully written Egyptian manuscripts

adorned with rubrics, there is no reason to

doubt that he was describing such a document as the source of “the record of

Abraham and Joseph.” And there can be no

doubt whatever that the manuscript he was

describing was and is an entirely different

one from that badly written, poorly

preserved little text, entirely devoid of

rubrics, which is today identified as the

Book of Breathings. One cannot insist too

strongly on this point since it is precisely the

endlessly repeated claim that the Book of

Breathings has been identified as the very

source of the Book of Abraham on which the

critics of Joseph Smith have rested their

whole case,14 oblivious to the howling absurdity of insisting that the book was

produced in a manner in which, as they

tirelessly demonstrate, no book could

possibly be produced, ever!

Not an Ordinary Funeral Text

From the first, experts explaining to the world the facsimiles in the Book of Abraham

have gone all out to emphasize above all

else the perfectly commonplace nature of

those documents, which can be found, in

Professor James Henry Breasted’s ringing

words, in “unnumbered thousands” in the

tombs of Egypt and the museums of the

world. 15 Aside from the irrelevance of such a proposition (for, as Egyptologists are

confessing in increasing numbers today,

familiarity with a phenomenon does not

guarantee that it is understood), it has now

become apparent, thanks to the diligent

researches of the Dutch scholar Bruno

Stricker, that our Joseph Smith Book of

Breathings is one of a very special and

limiteds and uniquely valuable class of

documents clustering around a single priestly

family of Upper Egypt in the first century

A.D.

The story, as Stricker tells it, begins in January 1820, when an English traveler, Sir

Frederick Henniker, crossed the river from

Luxor to the West Bank to watch some native

excavations taking place over there. “I was

standing by,” Sir Frederick reports in 1823,

“when the resurrection men found a

sepulchre; they offered me the haul,

unopened, for four guineas. It proves to be

Grecian-Egyptian, the first of its kind

hitherto discovered.” 16 He got his money’s worth; the complex of three chambers

yielded fourteen coffins. “There can be no

doubt,” writes Stricker, “that Henniker had

the fortune to behold with his own eyes the

opening of the tomb out of which more than

six museums have acquired their Roman-

Egyptian mummies. ”17

An inscription “on the principal coffin”

identified its occupant as one “Soter, the Son

of Cornelius Pollius…and an archon of

Thebes.” That title can mean six or seven different things, according to Stricker, but

always denotes a very important person. 18

He was head of the family, and the mummies

found with or near him (the site of the tomb

has never since been located)19 include his daughter Sensaos (an important Book of

Breathings was included with her remains

when she was brought to the Leiden Museum

in 1828)20 and her brother Petemenophis; there was another brother-sister pair, Tphous

and her brother Phaminis, and a pair of

sisters, Sensaos (another one) and Tkauthi,

buried in a single coffin which is now in

Berlin. There is a lady Cleopatra Candice

and an unnamed member of the family,

another Soter (now in Leiden), and another

Petemenophis. It is all a very cozy family

group. 21

Between 1820 and 1830 the Leiden

Museum also acquired, from the same

cemetery, the mummy of one Horsiese, priest of Amon-Re at Thebes, who deserves

special mention for being buried with no

fewer than four Books of Breathings and for

providing us with a priceless date for

determining the time when the family

flourished, for he was buried in the year

A.D. 64, at the age of 83, having been born

in the tenth year of the reign of Caesar

Augustus. 22 Horsiese was the son of Hor and the lady Qaiqai and also the owner of

Papyrus Louvre N. 3291, which matches our

Joseph Smith Papyri XI and X very

closely. 23 The Joseph Smith version, as is now well known, belonged to another Hor,

the son of Wosirwer ( Wsỉr-Wr) and

Taykhebyt; and the recurrence of the same

rare family names in virtually identical

documents, all found in the same limited area

and nowhere else and belonging to the same

time period, puts the Joseph Smith Book of

Breathings in a family economy package that establishes its approximate date without

trouble. The only discovery place mentioned

in any reports is the cemetery in Thebes,

near the village of Sheikh Abd-el-Qurna on

the west bank opposite Luxor—both Soter

and Horsiese had been important officials at

Thebes. There is only one cast of characters

in the drama, and the owner of the Joseph

Smith Papyri was a member of it. The site of

the tomb of Horsiese is still unknown today.

Sir Frederick, after impatiently

unwrapping the mummy of Soter on the spot

(it became lost, while the coffin finally

ended up in the British Museum), departed

from the scene, relinquishing the rest of his

prizes to “a Piedmontese traveller” by the

name of Antonio Lebolo, who “appeared on

the scene, and is known to us from the

accounts of [Giovanni] Belzoni and others as

a special collector and agent of the French

Consul and antiquities dealer [Bernardo]

Drovetti.” 24 Drovetti had assembled a store of mummies at Turin, and to these one of the

Soter family was added by Lebolo, who

seems to have taken complete charge of the

whole operation of distributing the important

findings. The curator of the Turin Museum,

reporting on the acquisition in 1824, writes:

“This mummy was found by a Piedmontese

traveller, Signore Lebolo, in a deep

sepulchre near ancient Thebes, … near …

the Arab village of Gournah. The form of the

tomb is not different from that of the others

which are found there in large numbers,

except that instead of being dug simply into

the rock or earth, it was at its lower depth

constructed of bricks and entirely decorated

inside with various pictures.” He goes on to

report that there were found “twelve or

thirteen coffins of wood, some better

preserved than others, … ornamented with

symbolic figures” and with portraits of their dead owners. 25 This tomb, plainly, was something extra. Worthy of note is that the

number of mummies, which Sir Frederick as

an eyewitness and owner had counted as

fourteen, is now reduced to “twelve or

thirteen” —which was it? The curator

naturally got his information from Lebolo,

and Lebolo knew how to juggle figures.

The Prussian general Heinrich von

Minutoli, who collected extensively in Egypt

for the Berlin Museum, complained bitterly

of the way Lebolo cheated him in the

purchase of mummies from Soter’s tomb,

among other things keeping a gilt or golden

crown for himself. 26 The changing of the report from fourteen to “twelve or thirteen”

mummies may be explained by Lebolo’s

keeping for himself in Trieste “what might

have been the finest mummy of all…but

which, so far as I know [writes Stricker] has

in more than a hundred years received no special mention by anyone. ”27 It simply dropped out of sight. In a letter published in

James Clark’s book, William Dawson cites

evidence to the effect that Lebolo and a

fellow Italian undertook “clandestine

excavation for their own account” while

ostensibly working for others; that they

“made a murderous attack upon Belzoni” (a

rash enough enterprise since Belzoni was

one of the strongest men in the world), and

“endeavored to obtain by fraud” some of

Belzoni’s loot. 28

When Michael H. Chandler later told

Lebolo’s story in Kirtland, the number of the

mummies was again reduced by one, and we

are asked to believe that Lebolo, after

employing “four hundred and thirty-three

men, four months and two days (if I

understand correctly)” —that is Joseph

Smith’s judicious aside—upon discovering

“several hundred mummies in the same catacomb; about one hundred embalmed after

the first order,” was content to take only

eleven mummies as the whole of his

plunder! 29 Why, after months of labor and vast expense, our hero chose to keep only

eleven of the hundreds of mummies,

including a hundred first-class ones he had

dug up—and, moreover, whatever became of

all the others—we are never told. As to the

four months of work preceding the great

discovery, Stricker notes that Lebolo

appeared on the scene only after Sir

Frederick had left—which is to say, he was

not present before or during the excavations

but showed up promptly for the sale and

distribution. 30 He was not the man to let hundreds of mummies slip through his

fingers. Yet instead of hundreds of mummies

on his hands, Lebolo had only eleven, and in

the end “the whole” of his collection, willed

to his distant nephew, consisted of just four mummies.31

Dawson in his letter has Lebolo himself

discovering, “in 1818, a pit-tomb at Gernah

(?)” (which is very probably the way he

would tell it) and distributing mummies to

“Baron Minatoli(?), … Frederic

Gailliand(?), … Giovanni Anastasi(?),” and

keeping one for himself, while “an account

of these mummies was written by Quintino di

San Guilia(?).” 32 Since he is so uncertain about so many things (the question marks are

his), one need not feel bound by Dawson’s

strict date of 1818 for the finding of the

mummies. That his sources and Stricker’s

are speaking of the same find, there can be

no doubt: Stricker’s Drovetti, San Quintino,

d’Anastasy, von Minutoli, and Frédéric

Caillaud would hardly come together again

after the early 1820s to let Lebolo trick them

on a second deal. By the same token,

Michael Chandler’s story tells of the same operation. It is strange that the name of the

hero appears in the History of the Church

only as Sebolo; 33 we will charitably take that as the misreading by a typesetter or

someone else of an “L” for an “S” —for if

Chandler, who claimed to be Lebolo’s

nephew and only heir, did not even know

how to pronounce his name, there is

something wrong.

There is something wrong anyway in his

story. According to Chandler, Lebolo, on his

way to Paris, merely put in at Trieste and

there died after ten days’ illness in 1832.34

According to others, Trieste was his base of

operations—he shipped the Minutoli

collection from there, and there were the

mummies he secretly kept back for his own

collection, including, as we have noted,

perhaps the finest of all. By all accounts, he

was acting as agent for and by authority of

Drovetti, consul general of France in Egypt, while also acting as diligent purveyor of

antiquities for the Turin Museum and other

collectors.35

So, here, Lebolo was on his way to Paris

with a load of stuff, and yet “he made a will

of the whole” to his distant nephew, Michael

Chandler. 36 By what authority could he will the whole to Chandler since he was only the agent for it? Chandler would have to

produce the will to prove ownership—did

anyone ever see it? According to Chandler,

the will was dated 1832, but is there any

evidence that Lebolo was alive after 1823?37

Dawson does not think so. Stricker finds that

there was great interest in these particular

mummies all over Europe in the early 1820s,

but by 1830 it had died out. 38 What is Lebolo doing bringing the collection from Egypt a decade after it had been distributed among

half a dozen museums?

Were there two such finds? Whether we follow Stricker or Dawson, the catalogues

and reports of museums have Lebolo’s

collection all safely tucked away by 1830.

The story that Lebolo did not find the stuff

until 7 June 1831 may well be Chandler’s

own. Was the will probated while Chandler

was in Philadelphia and the mummies in

Dublin? No. As he tells it, his “friends” in

Dublin simply sent them on to New York.

(Who paid the staggering freight? There must

have been arrangements.) In New York in

1833, Chandler simply “paid the duties and

took possession of the mummies.” How

could he claim them? He opened them right

there in the customs house and was “no little

chagrined” when he couldn’t find a trace of

“diamonds or valuable metal. ”39 His behavior is hardly more edifying than his

Uncle (?) Tony’s.

While he was still in the customs house,

“he was immediately told…that there was no man in that city who could translate his roll:

but was referred, by the same gentleman (a

stranger) to Mr. Joseph Smith, Jun., who…

had previously translated similar

characters.” 40 Note how Chandler avoids embarrassing questions by simply calling his

informant “a stranger”; he didn’t bother to

get the stranger’s name, yet on his authority

went all the way to Kirtland to consult

Joseph Smith, of whom, he says, he had

never heard before. And this just to get his

roll read—though all he thought of up to then

was diamonds and gold, and he was greatly

upset at not finding them. This is the way

Chandler told his story to the Latter-day

Saints later.

“From New York, he took his collection

on to Philadelphia [he lived in Philadelphia

and went to New York only to pick up the

mummies]…and from thence came on to

Kirtland, as before related, in July.” On to Kirtland! That is how he puts it—a beeline

to Kirtland; and after just two and a half

years he finally got there (July 1835)! Joseph

Smith’s asides—“if I understand

correctly,” 41 and “Mr. Chandler is responsible for the English of the above

certificate, and I do not feel at liberty to edit

it” 42—are warnings not to take Chandler’s story, published in the Messenger and

Advocate under the signature of Oliver

Cowdery, 43 uncritically.

Chandler’s mention of eleven mummies as

Lebolo’s original loot from the tomb fits

nicely with the “twelve or thirteen

mummies” that Lebolo reported and with the

fourteen mummies which Sir Frederick

Henniker saw taken out since it is known that

Lebolo, in the process of overseeing the

distribution of the mummies, kept choice

items back for himself.

But is the Joseph Smith text of the right age to belong in the Soter-Horsiese family?

Early texts and early mummies are

sometimes found in much later tombs. Thus

Lebolo claimed that one of the famous

Choachyte texts, discovered by him at the

same time and place that he acquired the

mummies, was found with Soter. Stricker

believes he was fibbing, “supposedly to

make the business more interesting

( pikanter) ,” 44 since the Choachyte texts belong to a “totally different time.” Stricker

also believes that certain mummies assigned

to the tomb of Soter by others belong to a

later date.45

The picture is indeed confusing, but by

good fortune, four of the ten photographs in

the third volume of Georg Möller’s

Hieratische Paläographie are from Books

of Breathings, and by comparing these and

other texts supplied by Möller to the Joseph

Smith characters, we can determine the date

of the latter with confidence. Let us take

from Joseph Smith Papyrus XI, column 1, the signs that are both clearly written and

peculiar (all the others being debatable):

(l) In lines 2 (middle) and 6 (end), the loaf-

over-bird combination ( tȝ) is matched most closely in Papyrus Leiden I 32. 46 (2) The milk-jug ( my) at the end of line 2 matches I 32 with one rival, Papyrus Rhind II. 47 (3) In line 3, the hand symbol showing no triangle

is found only in I 32.48 (4) The retouch of the face ( ḥr) in line 3 indicates an earlier

document in use at a later time; the peculiar

figure matches Papyrus Berlin 3030. 49 (5) In line 3, the heart symbol with the dot above it

is duplicated only in I 32. 50 (6) The hill sign ending line 3 is a type found only in I 32. 51

(7) The sail ideogram in line 4 is found only

in I 32. 52 (8) The papyrus-document sign next to it is matched only in I 32 and less so by 3030.53 (9) The scribe’s palette beginning

line 5 is found only in I 32 and 3030.54

(10) The untidy roadway sign in lines 5 and

7 is lopsided and has dots over it, a

combination found only in I 32. 55

The reader with access to Möller can

continue the game for himself and rediscover

the closest resemblance between the

handwriting of the Joseph Smith Papyri XI

and X and the Papyrus Leiden I 32 Book of

Breathings, with the Papyrus Berlin 3030

Breathings text (first to second century A.D.)

tagging along for retouches. This places the

original Joseph Smith manuscript circa A.D.

60 or a little later.

Chandler’s dating of the Lebolo find to

1831 was necessary to establish his own

ownership of the mummies; a gap of eight or

ten years would never do. The will to which

he makes pointed reference would have to

have been probated before that, and so he

must have it that Lebolo stayed alive until

1832, he taking possession of the mummies shortly after that “in the winter or spring of

1833.” 56 The tracing of the mummies from the various museums that received them

takes them all back through the same half-

dozen collectors to the excavation of January

1820.

A definitely authentic note is Chandler’s

report that when he opened two of his

mummies, he found “something rolled up

with the same kind of linen [as they were

wrapped in], saturated with the same

bitumen.” 57 This fits perfectly with the directions contained in the first column of

Joseph Smith Papyrus XI for wrapping up

the papyri with the mummy and is confirmed

by descriptions of the finding of the Sensaos

Papyrus (P. Leiden T 33): “at the side of the

mummy, outside the right arm,” it being

“folded and flattened” (Henniker described

the papyrus found on Sensaos’s father, Soter,

as being “folded flat”). Stricker finds this information to be of considerable

importance, these being the only instances in

which the original depositing of the papyri is

described. 58 It confirms Chandler’s description, and vice versa, and is another

reason for seeing a close connection

between the Joseph Smith and the other

Breathings papyri. Horsiese had fully five

papyri placed on his person. Two of them

were Books of Breathings of class 1 and two

were of class 2, 59 while the fifth was a lengthy version of the important Book of

Wandering through Eternity, which is

virtually another version of the Breathings

texts. 60 What we are faced with here is an important type of Egyptian communication

which has been lying neglected in our

museums “for over a century,” 61 of which the Joseph Smith manuscript is a precious

example.

Not Primarily a Funeral Text

The most important thing about the Book

of Breathings from the Latter-day Saint point

of view is that it is far more than a funeral

text, though, as Goyon observes, “it is

possible that at some time ( à une certaine

époque) the (second) Book of Breathings…

may have been recited in the course of

funeral ceremonies.” 62

In Egyptian, almost any word or

expression designating a place or state not of

this world can be equated with the word

necropolis, and so the general public has always thought of the Egyptians as people

with a graveyard fixation. Yet long ago,

Richard Lepsius, Adolf Erman’s teacher,

suggested that the purpose of the Book of the

Dead was to prepare the living for the

hereafter.63 Some other funerary texts, it was later noted, also contain prescriptions which

plainly apply to the living as well as the

dead. 64 Eberhard Otto now discovers in the Coffin Texts that “the magical content of the

spells can also benefit the living” and that at

least the mythical material “seems to have

been adapted only in a very secondary way

as funeral texts, ”65 while Walter Federn draws the surprising conclusion that “many,

if not all, of the Coffin Texts were primarily

used in this life.” 66 Hellmut Brunner goes so far as to state that the Pyramid Texts

themselves have nothing to do with a royal

funeral, 67 and according to Albertyna Szczudłowska, it was only as an afterthought

that important Middle Egyptian texts were

later “copied for funeral purposes on the

papyrus.” 68 Papyrus Leiden T 32, largest of the Breathings texts, contains a “summing-up

of the relevant cultic activities” of the owner

during his lifetime. 69

But if the mortuary use of at least some

important texts is secondary, what was their

original primary function? They were temple texts used in the performance of ordinances

—“an inventory of the holiest mysteries,” the

saving ordinances, which were “carried out

or witnessed” by both the living and the

dead. 70 After noting that only two types of monuments survive from Egypt’s glorious

past—namely, tombs and temples, Alexandre

Moret goes on to show that in Egypt, tomb

and temple are virtually identical in form

and function. 71 Joachim Spiegel points out that “the themes which are touched upon in

the separate steps of the temple cult were in

fact the very same as those in the

corresponding places within the pyramid,”

while the “formulas employed…had the

same content and the same relative

positions.” 72 After Pepy I, he notes, the inscriptions found in royal tombs are

definitely taken from the temple ritual.73

Moret calls attention to a “perfect

resemblance” between the funeral rites, the temple rites, and the daily toilet of the

Pharaoh,74 and Aylward Blackman in some remarkable studies illustrates that fact in

detail, showing how the business of

awakening, washing, dressing, etc., of the

king, carried out during the ceremonies of

mummification, by way of preparing the

dead to arise refreshed in the next world,

“closely resembles the daily service

performed in all Egyptian temples in historic times.” 75

Since the 1950s, writes Gertrud Thausing,

the Egyptian Book of the Dead has been

ready for a new interpretation, a need which

has become increasingly urgent with the

remarkable accumulation of information

regarding the whole scope of the human past

that has come forth since World War II. 76 We should now see that work as “a vade mecum

for the Zwischenzeit, ” the transition of the

soul between worlds; it is not only a funerary text but “a book of the living for

conducting initiations here on earth.” It is

perfectly natural that rites designed to obtain

a state of blessedness for an initiate in the

hereafter should be repeated impressively

for the last time at his funeral as an ultimate

initiation, for where do the things of the

eternities come into sharper focus than at a

funeral? Pyramid Texts, Coffin Texts, and

Books of the Dead all instruct one in the way

of the initiate in both worlds, all employing

the same language and imagery for living as

for dead, according to Thausing. 77 As Thausing puts it, “The way of the soul in the

other world corresponds to the steps in an

earthly initiation through which the

hierophant had to pass in the temple during

the years of his training.” 78 “How can a mortuary ritual be an initiatory ritual?” asks

Professor S. G. F. Brandon, assuring us in

reply that “the paradox disappears on analysis,” since “a mortuary ritual may serve

to initiate…into a new form of life. ”79 In fact, an Egyptian word for burial ( bs) means

“to initiate one into the mysteries.” 80 As his ultimate objective, the dead requests

“permission to enter into the holy of holies

of the temple of Heliopolis” on the grounds

that as an “elder” he has been initiated into

the deepest secrets of the temple. 81

Two of the most important new directions

in Egyptology, according to Brunner, are the

study of temple inscriptions and the

examination of the nature and function of the

Egyptian temple itself. 82 “Elements heretofore viewed as stereotypes of

Ptolemaic temple decoration,” for example,

“turn out…to be exceedingly important

elements in understanding the ‘Grammar of

the Temple.’” Who would imagine that at this

late date there has not yet appeared a

complete publication of the inscriptions of any Egyptian temple, or that as yet

systematic publications even for the great

temple of Karnak are almost completely

lacking? 83 Today, however, more attention is being paid to temple rites, especially in

view of the present emphasis among students

of all religions on the nature and importance

of the idea of initiation in ancient religion. 84

Paul Barguet, defending the traditional

view against the rising tide of

“initiationism,” insists that nothing in the

Book of the Dead indicates initiation for the

living.85 Well, that is hardly where one would expect to find such; and Barguet is

quick to add in a footnote, “That is not to say

that there was no initiation in Egypt; on the

contrary, the formulas of chapters 112–15

prove” that there was. He calls attention to

chapters describing rites performed both by

and for the living but explains that the living

initiates, since they were required to possess special knowledge (as all initiates are), must

have been priests.86 But the question is not about the rank of the hierophants, but only

whether the living were initiated into the

ordinances, which they were.

“To maintain,” writes Federn, “that

precisely ancient Egypt should not have

known some kind of initiation—and

initiation rites, like the rest of the world—is

plainly absurd, and irreconcilable with the

existence there of a hierarchy.” He goes on

to suggest that the “initiation” texts of the

Book of the Dead are a development from

the earlier “transformation” texts of the

Coffin Texts. 87 That is merely a question of modern terminology, however, since

initiation, as a process of transition, always

requires a change of identity. Conspicuous in

the Egyptian rites is the identification of the

initiate with the king, and as such with the

god’s son and finally with the god himself. If the funeral and temple rites are the same,

both were originally performed for the

benefit of the king, and in both the individual

initiate is both a priest and a king, the

imagery of the coronation predominating

throughout. 88

It has often been noted how closely the

Egyptian funeral rites follow those of the

coronation; and the regular temple

ceremonies, we now learn, were nothing but

“a small concentrate of the coronation

ceremonies.” 89 In the Books of Breathings, the rites performed by and for both living

and dead are the same for individual

Egyptians as they were for Pharaoh himself,

though there is ample indication that it was

not always so. 90 Also, since all major rites had to coincide in time with the beginnings

and endings of cosmic cycles—solar, lunar,

and astral—as well as the seasonal cycles of

life and vegetation, they are all interrelated to the point of identity within the cosmic

pattern.91 There is, François Daumas points out, “a profound and essential association

between the rites prescribed by the cult and

the rhythm of the universe,” the structure of

the temple and its ordinances being “inserted

into the very order of the cosmos.” 92

Significantly, Stricker, in his study of the

Breathings texts, lays the strongest emphasis

on their concern with the cosmic phenomena

of the winter solstice. 93

If the Egyptians ritualized all the historic

doings of Pharaoh as they did all the great

periodic phenomena of nature, involving the

entire human race in the major ceremonies,

then it becomes pointless to draw the line

between this world and the beyond. 94

Indeed, the contemplation of this unbroken

continuity of life “from eternity to eternity”

is the very purpose and function of the

temple. What we have in the greatest of all the Breathings texts—that of Horsiese,

according to Stricker—is a cultic

autobiography of a priest of Amon-Re at

Thebes, concerned as much with rites

performed by the living Horsiese as for the

dead one. 95 As in the case of the related Papyrus Salt 825, we are here “in the

presence of a fundamental ceremonial,” the

recognition of which marks “a veritable

renewal of religious studies and a new

attempt to discover under the apparent forms

the mentality of those to whom the myths, the

gods, and the rites were a reality.” 96

Not a Mere Talisman against Foul

Odors

The Joseph Smith Book of Breathings

opens with a statement of advantages to be

gained from possession of the book and

knowledge of its contents. Among these is no

mention either of breathing or a sweetened atmosphere; the author has higher things in

view.

The Egyptian rites and ordinances with

which we are concerned can only be

comprehended as part of a very large

picture. The word snsn itself is used in the Breathings texts with a number of different

but related meanings, emphasizing now one

aspect of the discourse and now another,

broadening the picture and clarifying rather

than confusing it. Preoccupation with

breathing in a funerary situation is

understandable enough, and almost any

Egyptian funeral text could safely be called a

“Book of Breathings,” since all deal with

renewal of life and resurrection of the flesh,

both of which for the Egyptian mean

breathing first of all.97

Some of the most important chapters of the

Book of the Dead are entitled “For Giving a

Breeze to NN in the Realm of the Dead. ”98

The Egyptian associated life, light, air,

breath, and everything good in a single

symbol, the nfr-sign, showing the heart and respiratory passages, 99 including the esophagus, for the breathing pipes were also

the way of nourishment: in a single intake

one absorbs life, breath, nourishment, health,

vigor—everything good. 100 The aim of the mysteries is “to give life and joy through the

nose, and joy to the heart with the aroma of

ỉbr-ointment, supplying the king with the

fragrance of the mighty ones.” 101 The commonest epithets of divinity depict the

deity either as the provider of air, sqr hty.t,

“who causes the heart (windpipe) to

breathe,” or as himself, wind, air, breath of

life.102

For the Egyptians, the giving of breath is

endowment with life in the widest sense (fig.

3). Thus, Georges Posener notes, the king is

petitioned “to give the breath of life to him who suffocates” and spare the life of a

servant, for he is “the creator of the air,”

whose own mouth “bears breath to

humans. ”103 Yet there is no known representation of Pharaoh bestowing breath

or life symbols on anyone, while there are

thousands depicting gods doing the same.

Why is that? Because in his breath-giving

capacity the king is wholly divine, absorbed

in the person of the life-giving god; he is the

creator, “Khnum,…who puts the breath of

life in every man’s nose, ”104 who “created the animals by the breath of his mouth, and

breathed forth the flowers…of the field.” 105

As the Apis-bull, he is also “the living

breath” of Ptah the creator;106 he is Horus of Edfu, who “puts breath into the nose of the

dead” ;107 he is he who announced to them in the underworld, “I bring light to the

darkness…: who sees me shall breathe, let

him breathe who exalts my appearance!” 108

—to which they reply, “We breathe when we

see him; may the king N breathe when he

sees him.…We breathe, rejoicing in Sheol

(Quererts).” 109 Because, as Osiris, he is brought back to life “as he smells the air of

Isis,” who, as she fans him with her wings,

says, “I put wind into his nose.” 110 He is able to restore others to life: “Your throats

breathe when you hear the word of

Osiris.” 111 For he himself is the greater breather: “Osiris breathes, Osiris breathes,

in truth Osiris breathes, his members have

truly been rejuvenated” ;112 “thou breathest out the air that is in thy throat into the noses

of men. How divine is that from which

mankind lives! It is all united in thy nostrils,

the tree and its foliage, the rushes,…the

grain, barley, and fruit trees.…Thou art the

father and mother of humanity, who live by

thy breath.” 113 The Book of Breathings is not

to be dismissed, as it has been, as a mere

talisman against stinking corpses; it is a

sermon on breathing in every Egyptian sense

of the word.

Figure 3. The ba- bird giving life and breath (the ankh and sail) to the mummy of the vizier Paser, while

Anubis “causes [his] flesh to be established so that

[his] blood vessels may prosper” (Theban Tomb 106, ca. 1290–1250 B.C.).

The Berlin Dictionary (usually simply called the Wörterbuch, abbreviated Wb) gives a wealth of meanings for the word

snsn, all of which fall under two categories.

First, there is the idea of air and breath in all

its permutations: to smell, breathe; to exude

an odor; to inhale air or the breath of life;

der Odem, the breath of life itself; the stench of a corpse. 114 In charge of this department is the goddess Merit, identified with Maat, who

enjoys considerable prominence in our Book

of Breathings. Supervising the functions of

esophagus and windpipe, she supplies both

nourishment and breath of life (one actually

eats and breathes her) and in that capacity

enjoys a relationship of peculiar intimacy

with every individual, even as she hangs on

the kingly and priestly breast as a pectoral

that both embraces and is embraced by the

royal person.115 In this sense “the son of Atum-Re says, He hath begotten me by his

nose: I came forth from his nostrils. Place me upon his breast, that he might embrace me

with his sister Maat.” 116 Snsn is the air that infuses and pervades: “Thy nostrils inhale

( nšp) the air, thy nose breathes ( snsn) the north wind,…thy throat gulps in air, thou

incorporatest life into thy body.” 117 Isis and Nephthys prevent decay and evil odor by

fanning with their wings, but that is also the

favorable wind which enables the dead to

progress by ship on his or her journey in the

hereafter.118

But breathing is only half the story. It is

significant that the clear statement of the

purpose of the snsn papyrus, as given in its introductory lines, makes no mention

whatever of breathing! This bids us consider

the broader and more venerable ritual

background of the word. The rites set forth in

the Shabako document—an early coronation

drama—culminate when the new king “unites

himself with the royal court and mingles ( snsn) with the gods of Ta-tenen.” 119 Kurt Sethe finds the expression for “mingle with”

( snsn r) in the Pyramid Texts also, and it means, according to him, sich zu jemand

gesellen. He duly notes that “the writing is commonly used in later times for snsn,

‘inhale,’ being mistakenly regarded as a

reduplication of sn, ‘to kiss.’” 120 Another document going back to the earliest times

uses the same word in the same way, telling

how “Maat came down from heaven in their

times and united herself to those who dwell

upon the earth”; or, in another version:

“Maat came down [to earth] in their time and

mingled with ( snsn ḥnʿ) the gods”; or, in yet another: “Maat came from heaven to earth

and mingled ( snsn.n=s) with all the

gods.” 121 Otto renders the word mingled (appearing as both snsn=s and snsn.n=s) as sie verbrüderte sich mit and indeed, in the

last sentence the word is written simply with the picture of two men shaking hands. 122 One is reminded of the ritual joining of heaven

and earth by the winds,123 or the joining of the two banks of the Nile by the Two

Ladies. 124

This picture of Maat mingling freely with

mankind in the “golden age” before the fall

forcibly brings to mind Psalm 85:11: “Truth

[ ʾemet, possibly cognate with the Egyptian Maat] shall spring out of the earth; and

righteousness [ maat is the Egyptian word for righteousness] shall look down from

heaven.” But even more relevant is the less

familiar verse that precedes it: “Mercy and

truth are met together; righteousness and

peace have kissed” (Psalm 85:10). For snsn,

as we have seen, means “kiss.” There is

nothing more intimate than breath, and one

and the same Egyptian word ( ḫm) can mean

odor, nose, nostril, smell, sniff, breathe,

perfume, caress, and love. 125 The queen of Egypt became pregnant “when the aroma of

Amon penetrated all her members.” 126 Snsn, then, is indicative of the closest and most

intimate association. In the Thirteenth

Dynasty King Neferhotep prays “that I may

associate ( snsn) with all the gods,” 127 which is quite in order when one remembers that sn

is the Egyptian word for “brother” and is

written with the two-pronged harpoon or

spear, 128 being also the common root for

“two” in the Semitic languages (compare our

“twain,” “twin,” etc.; the one-pronged

harpoon was always the sign for “one”). The

reduplicate snsn makes a verb of it and also acts as an intensive, like the second form in

Arabic. This idea of twinship or brotherhood

is apparent when a god comes down to his

temple and his ba fuses ( snsn) with his

“form,” meaning his image in the temple.129

According to the Wörterbuch, snsn,

written either with the “bolt-s”

or the

two-pronged harpoon , can mean to join a

company or unite with a group (formed by

reduplicating the word sn, “brother”); to unite, fraternize, become a friend of; hence to

join the company of the gods (said of the

dead); to reach heaven and mingle with the

stars; to enter a bond of brotherhood; to

marry with; to unite oneself with the king, or

to praise or honor a king or god—hence

praise, honor; to unite oneself with one’s

image (said of a god coming to his temple);

to unite oneself with the light. The two main

ideas of snsn, breathing and joining, meet and fuse in such meanings as “fragrance,

light, air, as joining themselves to

something”; hence adornment, things

adorning the body; to invest another object

or fuse with it, as of a person with the stars

or a god with his image, crowns, or

vestments; incense suffusing the body; or

crowns joining together to make one. 130 The Pyramid Text designation of snsn as a

consuming fire calls forth the vivid image of

the pharaoh or the blessed spirit invested

and suffused with flames which carry him up

to heaven. 131

Snsn is, then, a very flexible word which

remains nonetheless remarkably true to its

basic meaning. This can be seen in a passage

from the Book of Wandering through Eternity

(the companion piece to the Book of

Breathings, as we have noted): “Thy nose

breathes ( snsn) the north wind,…thou kissest ( snsn) Osiris in the great Golden House,…

thou passest the gates of the gods of the

qrty.w (chambers of the underworld) and

unitest thyself to ( snsn m) the company of the saved.” 132 Here, breathing, embracing, and fraternizing are all expressed by the same

word, with strong emphasis on initiation.

The Unique Importance of the

Book of Breathings

Its Timing

Not long ago, Giuseppe Botti declared that

“the Book of Breathings is without doubt the

most important exponent of the funerary

literature which flourished especially at

Thebes about the first and second centuries

after Christ.” 133 Two things in particular contribute to that importance—the timing and

the packaging of the text.

Consider first the timing. Coming from the first century A.D., our Breathings texts are

not only “the last religious texts of heathen

inspiration to come forth in Egypt,” but they

are also “the last example of the use of

hieratic script,” that standard vehicle of

religious thought which goes back to the

earliest times in Egypt. 134 Here alone the main idea of Egyptian religion from the

Pyramid Age down to the rule of the Byzantines can be traced in an unbroken

line, 135 for the simple reason that only at the end of the tale can the whole tale be told.

“The ideas and beliefs expressed in it [the

Book of Breathings] are not new,” as E. A.

Wallis Budge observed; “indeed, every one

of them may be found repeated in several

places in the religious works of the ancient

Egyptians.…All the gods mentioned…are

found in the oldest texts.” 136 Though found in Thebes, the manuscripts refer often and

unmistakably to their Memphite-Heliopolitan

origins at the beginnings of Egyptian

civilization. 137 Containing “elements taken from the Pyramid Texts, the Book of the Dead, along with phrases and concepts

already met with on the steles and

sarcophagi of the Middle and New

Kingdoms,” and coming last of all in the line

of such documents, the Book of Breathings is

the great time binder, wrapping everything up right back to the beginning. 138 Hence Stricker can characterize the Breathings

book of Horsiese as resembling “an

inventory of the sacrosanct mysteries which

were carried out in the great religious

centers of Egypt, carefully worked out by

priests from the experience and the records

of an unbroken heritage that went back to

prehistoric times.…Here are in fact the most

secret secrets of Egypt brought together,

perhaps schematically arranged, and in a

scope that renders the project a mine of

information for the study of cultic

topography.” 139 At Esna, according to E. A.

E. Reymond, “we find…clear evidence of

the adoption of traditions of some ancient

places by temples of late date…preserved

and revived by actual use in the temple

ritual.” 140 Studies of the latest period of Egyptian religion tend more and more to

show “how tenaciously the Egyptian traditions preserved their ritual background

even in their transition to the Greek

medium.” 141 If the Book of Breathings, the latest of all native Egyptian documents, is

written in “an archaizing Middle Egyptian,”

it shows a firm grasp of ancient traditions. 142

There has always been a natural tendency

to give older Egyptian texts unchallenged

priority of value over younger ones. But a

number of studies have demonstrated the

weakness of such a position. Thus Erich

Winter’s investigations at Philae have

surprised everyone by showing how “the

preservation of older religious concepts and

philosophical views” enabled the later

periods to carry on with what they had and

make solid and original contributions of their

own;143 what Winter found was not the expected intellectual paralysis of a late and

decadent age, but “vigorous intellectual

activity” inspired by continued

contemplation of the age-old ordinances.144

It has been the practice to dismiss

monotonous and repetitive reliefs and

inscriptions as just more-of-the-same, as

mere dull, unimaginative repetition; but many

scholars today are pointing out that that will

not do—that only by careful examination of

each detail, no matter how tedious and

trivial the task may seem, can we realize

what was really going on and achieve a new

respect for the documents and monuments of

the late periods. 145

Stricker points out that in Egyptian the

latest texts may well be the best, just as the

Masoretic is a good text precisely because it

is the last, its author being in a position to

sum up and use and select from all that has

gone before; by the mere mechanical process

of collecting and preserving, a conscientious

late text like Papyrus Leiden T 32 can give

us what we can find nowhere else: a selection containing all that is vital and

enduring in the whole vast tradition. 146

Instead of being marked by poverty, the Late

Period is remarkable for the richness of its

documents, according to László Kákosy, who

cites as shining examples chapter 125 of the

Book of the Dead, the Rhind Papyrus (both

very closely related to the Book of

Breathings), and finally the Book of

Breathings itself.147 And instead of being mindlessly and mechanically thrown

together, the elements contained in the Book

of Breathings are “skillfully worked

together” to form a meaningful whole. 148

Its Packaging

Consider next the packaging of our

treasure. If the late date of the Breathings

papyrus paradoxically enhances its value, its

extremely brief scope, which has caused it in

the past to be easily brushed aside as a mere amulet or charm, is another blessing in

disguise. For the object was to convey a life-

saving message in the smallest possible

scope; it was an “attempt to sum up in a

relatively short text all the formulas essential

to a normal existence, comparable to our

earth-life, after death,” to embrace in one

small and handy booklet “all the texts

essential for the salvation of the soul.” 149

The limiting of space to bare essentials,

Nathaniel Reich observes in commenting on

one of the shortest of the Breathings texts, “is

precisely what makes this small text more

important than some of the larger ones of its

kind.” 150 In all of Egyptian literature “no other text can be found,” according to

Stricker, “which in such a compact form

contains such a great number of items

concerning Egyptian religious practices

( gödsdienst) ” as the Breathings text Leiden

T 32.151 That abbreviation is the established rule for such texts is apparent from their

appearance on various steles, in all of which

“only the beginning of the text is given, being

ever abruptly cut off with a concluding

formula.” 152 The same peculiarity appears in the writing on late mummy cases, in which

only the beginning characters of some words

are written. 153

The passion for saving everything

inevitably leads to vast, unwieldy

accumulations of stuff, and from the first the

Egyptians display a parallel genius for

summarizing and condensing in their

determination to retain everything but avoid

being crushed under the weight of

accumulating baggage. The Egyptians seem

always to have had this mania for

repackaging, the signs of a busy abbreviating

and epitomizing being apparent from the very

beginning and gaining momentum steadily

down through the centuries. 154 The Book of the Dead itself is only “a supplementary

aid,” according to Barguet, confined, for all

its impressive bulk, to stating the absolute

minimum and getting by with statements only

long enough to be recognizable.155 The progressive compression within the Book of

the Dead itself may be seen in chapter 64,

entitled “a formula [chapter] for knowing the

other formulas for going out by day in a

single formula.” The text of a funerary

writing known as the Amduat, the venerable

predecessor of the Book of Breathings,

appears in a version anciently designated as

sḥwy, meaning a list drawn up to present “a summary of essentials.” 156 Such a summary was in turn epitomized in a still briefer table

of contents, which eventually came to be

accepted as the official text of the Amduat

itself. 157 The Book of Wandering through Eternity, a writing which has actually been

identified with the Book of Breathings, attempts to jam together in its closing lines

every conceivable good wish and every

indispensable requirement for the dead in the

next world. 158 Even the longest Book of Breathings, Papyrus Leiden T 32, is, as we

have noted, a miracle of condensation.

“There is no other Egyptian text which

contains such a great number of items

concerning Egyptian religious service in so

condensed a form.” 159

Hence we may well be suspicious when

Budge explains the brevity of the Book of

Breathings by suggesting that the Egyptians

had become bored by the old Book of the

Dead “with its lengthy Chapters and

conflicting statements” that few people

understood.160 Since when were the Egyptians repelled by long religious texts

(which they were not required to read) or by

contradictory statements, or since when does

the process of high-pressure condensation render texts more instead of less

understandable?

More convincing is Émile Chassinat’s

explanation, put forward again by Goyon,

that the very brief Books of Breathings were

meant for the poor who could not afford long

and expensive funerary texts. 161 As Reich explains it: “The poverty of the party which

caused the abbreviation of the usually very

elaborate text of the various kinds of the

Book of the Dead forced the writer of our

small papyrus leaf to condense or to select

those wishes which were most desirable for

the departed with respect to their supposed

importance for the life to come.” 162 Granted the advantages of such abbreviation for texts

of class 1, is this the reason for our highly

condensed class 2 Breathings texts? If so,

why are they found only on the mummies of

important and affluent people who could

afford much better? And why are they the only funerary texts of their time, superseding

all other mortuary literature and completely

supplanting the Book of the Dead, so that in

time “the Book of Breathings” came to be “a

general term for funerary literature? ”163

Poverty can hardly explain a practice of

abbreviation which found universal

acceptance among all classes.

A better explanation for the extremely

condensed form of the text is suggested by

Philippe Derchain’s accounting for the same

characteristic in Papyrus Salt 825. This

document, long known to Egyptologists but

brushed aside as a late and trivial piece of

magic, is now shown to be a ritual text of the

first magnitude. Its importance was

overlooked because of the nature of its

composition—a few notes dashed off by a

priest “in a very concise and sometimes

obscure form” to serve as a prompter during

certain ceremonies, a “sorte d’aide-mémoire” as Derchain puts it, to make sure

that everything would go off in the proper

order. 164 The Egyptians did not read from the large and ornate scrolls in their ceremonies,

but only from small pages held in the hand

like note cards; moreover, the texts were

“perfectly familiar” to the learned reader,

who needed the notes only to jog his memory

with minimal jottings as he went through the

long ceremonies.165

Given a choice between the magnificent

Leiden T 32 Book of Breathings and the

brief and battered Joseph Smith version, this

sentimental writer would, after some

hesitation, choose the latter. Both are

condensations, but the shorter version in just

two pages, measuring only five by seven

inches, mentions in proper order every step

of a long and elaborate course of initiation,

introducing all “the elements necessary and

sufficient for overcoming the great obstacles” to eternal salvation. 166 But what is more, this little text was really used. The

hastily scribbled and highly personalized

writing was for one man’s eyes alone; the

text was found clutched to the owner’s breast

in death as his most treasured possession;

and indeed, the document itself informs us

that it is a highly secret and personal thing of

immense value to the owner and to no one

else. This is, moreover, no finely written and

eye-satisfying ceremonial scroll, such as the

other funeral texts of the same collection or

the other Books of Breathings; it is frayed

and battered, not only at the edges but on the

surface, where various characters have been

rather clumsily re-inked to restore them.

Column 1 of the Joseph Smith Book of

Breathings is written in a bold, free hand,

with all the room in the world to spare, but

by the fourth column the scribe is in trouble

and badly crowded for space. This, like the ill-formed characters, indicates that the

writer was no professional scribe, who

would never have made such an elementary

miscalculation. The plain evidence that it

was actually used over a period of time

makes this a very rare document indeed

among funeral texts. Stricker asks whether

all 696 cultic operations listed in Papyrus

Leiden T 32 were actually carried out or

attended by the dead; he decides that they

were not and that we will never know which

of the rites were actually performed. 167 It is a different story with the Joseph Smith

Papyrus: here we have the clearest

indication as to which of the many

ordinances received priority and were

actually carried out—not once, but often—by

the subject.

What we have in the Joseph Smith

Papyrus, then, is the most intimate and

private version of “a final codification of the religious and magic literature that was

transmitted down from the predynastic

time,” 168 skillfully summarizing and epitomizing the whole Egyptian religious

heritage in such a manner as to preserve the

original concepts virtually unchanged. That

marvelous Egyptian conservatism that would

never allow anything to be lost and defied

any “development of social and ethical

thought” 169 assures that our text contains those “basic ideas which belong to the

constants of Egyptian thought” and which

never changed. 170

Jewish and Christian Ties

But that is only half the story. If all the past

was neatly packaged, it was not for the

purpose of bundling it away out of sight and

mind forever; the effect was, rather, to give it

a new lease on life, for this very bundle was

picked up by the Jews and Christians in Egypt to become part of their own heritage.

It is being increasingly noted that authentic

Egyptian elements turn up in Judeo-Christian

sources, and one may now well ask whether

an important bridge between the two was not

the Book of Breathings. The first scholars to

study that document were impressed by its

high moral tone and strong resemblance to

the Bible, noting that it “bears the imprint of

an essential religious feeling and contains

moral maxims whose striking agreement with

the precepts of the Jewish lawgiver and with

those of the Christ has already been pointed

out by Egyptologists.” 171 If the salient features of Egyptian cult and doctrine remain

constant, the religious life of Egypt had

nonetheless its moments of fresh inspiration

and new direction. One such creative period

was that which brought in the Books of

Breathings, beginning with the Amduat,

which “introduces a new epoch of Egyptian ideas concerning the next world,” 172 putting the ancient and uncorrupted Pyramid and

Coffin Texts, etc., to new uses. 173 The Breathings texts, continuing the same

tradition, nonetheless contain elements of

originality on their own. 174 Common to the Amduat and the Breathings texts is a metric

structure, which Stricker can stoutly affirm is

nothing in the world “but the old

parallelismus membrorum of the Hebrew

poetry.” 175

In the late period, Kákosy observes, the

Greek- and Aramaic-speaking inhabitants of

Egypt became increasingly attached to the

old Egyptian cult of the dead and its rites;176

he bids us compare the otherworld pictures

of the Greek apocalypses of Enoch and Peter

found buried with a Christian of the ninth

century at Akhmim with the descriptions

found buried with his ancestors of pharaonic

times to see how little they have changed. 177

Stricker links up the Egyptian mysteries—

which reached Greece “in hoary antiquity,”

where they “reached a peak of importance

and had profound influence on the cult of

rising Christianity” —with the Book of

Breathings, noting that the list of mystery cult

centers given by the Greek Epiphanius in his

Panarion is the same list that occurs in

Papyrus Leiden T 32.178 And just as the Book of Breathings was written by Isis and

goes back ultimately to the cult of the

creator-god Ptah at Memphis, so the

inscriptions scattered throughout Greece in

praise of the virtues of Isis have now been

traced to an original in the temple of Ptah at

Memphis, showing that in the Book of

Breathings we are dealing with no late

innovations or foreign intrusions. 179

The Jewish and Christian Enoch literature

contains striking affinities with the Egyptian

teachings, 180 and in his examination of this literature Matthew Black points out that

much of it was composed to serve as

funerary texts and is actually found in graves,

and that the subject matter has to do “with

the theme of life after death, a fact which

accounts for their presence in a place of

Christian burial.” Also, the state of the

manuscripts “suggests that these texts were

transcribed, possibly even in haste, for the

sole purpose of inclusion in the grave of a

relative or friend.” Moreover, Black finds a

definite “unity of theme” in all such

writings. 181 From this it would appear that the whole idea of a special text like the Book

of Breathings, written as a personal

possession of the deceased and buried with

him as a vade mecum to the next world,

carries right over into the Christian economy.

What is more, the content of such documents remains the same, as a perusal of the Jewish

and Christian documents included in the appendixes of this book should make

clear.182

Classification of Breathings Texts

Stricker’s Classification

The various Breathings texts form a single

family, which Stricker has classified under

three main divisions. His class 1 is “a cycle

of texts” to which scholars first gave the

name Que mon nom fleurisse; this includes some lengthy composite texts containing

sections with titles of their own, conspicuous

among which is the Egyptian designation

“First Book of Breathings” and a sign long

misread as “Second Book of Breathings.” 183

Of this class, Chassinat wrote, “The things

reported, the concepts presented, are

identical in all of them [the manuscripts], but

the form in which they are expressed varies

almost to infinity…according to the caprice

or personal beliefs of the scribe and the resources of the buyer.” 184 So great is the variety and freedom of the texts of class 1

that, according to Goyon, it is impossible to

discover which version or versions may

come closest to the original.185

The Joseph Smith Book of Breathings

belongs to Stricker’s class 2 of documents,

which the Egyptians entitled “The Book of

Breathings Made by Isis for Her Brother

Osiris.” 186 Stricker lists over a dozen texts of this category, including Papyri Louvre N.

3284 and 3291, edited by Philippe-Jacques

de Horrack; the Kerasher text of the British

Museum (no. 9995), edited with a full-scale

color reproduction by Budge; and Papyri

Berlin 3135 and 3030 and Rhind II,

published by Möller in his Hieratische

Paläographie. It is most fortunate for us that the Joseph Smith Papyrus belongs to this

class, all the members of which are very

much alike, thus presenting us with something like a “standard text” and

obviating the necessity of constantly

deciding between conflicting readings. 187

All the texts of class 2 contain lists of

ordinances brief enough to be carried out at

one time and place, possibly within a single

day; and what is more important, all contain

the same formulas in the same order. Here, if

anywhere, is our practical handbook of

ordinances, and not in class 1, whose

prescriptions are so numerous and so varied

that it is impossible to imagine anyone

performing them all on a single occasion.

Nor is class 3 of much help, for though it

contains some of the same formulas as occur

in the other two classes, there are so very

few of them and they are so disorganized,

being simply thrown together in any order to

serve as mere ornamental appendages to the

owners’ names, that no one today would

dignify any of them with the name of a Book of Breathings had the ancient scribes not

marked them with that ill-fitting title. 188

Ties with Abraham?

Its late timing makes both possible and

necessary the condensed and selective

packaging of our Book of Breathings: it

gives us all the essentials in the handiest

form. Tendencies “prevalent in all late

Upper Egyptian Temples,” Reymond

observes, “create from the actual temple a

real archive of Egyptian traditions.” 189 It is at the temple that all things are brought

together. It is an interesting coincidence that

from the first, the Joseph Smith Papyri were

displayed in a place of honor in the temple,

first in Kirtland and then in Nauvoo—“not

ownly the hieroglyphicks,” wrote Wilford

Woodruff in Kirtland, “but also many figures

that this precious treasure contains are

calculated to make a lasting impression upon the mind.” 190

The Saints were taught to associate some

of these documents (now missing) with

Abraham. That seems a spectacular leap

until we consider the broader picture. It can

be easily shown by matching up the cut edges

and fibers of the papyri that the text of the

Joseph Smith “Breathings” Papyrus (JSP XI;

see color plate 2) was written on the same

strip of material as Facsimile 1 (see color

plate 1) and immediately adjoined it.

Though, as we have seen, the two do not

obviously go together (see p. 33, fig. 5); we

have demonstrated at considerable length

that the lion-couch scene in Facsimile 1

could conceivably be used to illustrate an

important episode from the life of Abraham,

described in the book of Abraham but not

found in the Bible or in any sources

available to Joseph Smith or his

contemporaries. 191 It has to do with Abraham’s legendary involvement in rituals

of royal succession in which he had the

honor of serving as a sacrificial substitute

for a king or pharaoh. There is much

traditional evidence that Abraham actually

did find himself in such a situation, and there

is no dearth of evidence to show that the

Egyptians did engage in such practices.

Whether this points specifically to Abraham

or not, the situation depicted in Joseph Smith

Papyrus I (Facsimile l) belongs to that type

of Egyptian initiatory ordinances which go

back to the coronation and creation. So do

the other two facsimiles, which also belong

with the Book of Breathings. The same props

and characters that appear in Facsimile 3,

for example, adorn the first page of the

Kerasher Book of Breathings in the British

Museum, a “presentation scene.” 192 In Papyrus Rhind II Thoth clutches the

Breathings document firmly and

conspicuously in his right hand, as the

initiate’s passport (fig. 4).

But what about Facsimile 2, the well-

known round “hypocephalus”? As far as we

can tell, it would seem that all Books of

Breathings were meant to serve as

hypocephali, being placed under either the

head or the feet of the mummy and in some

cases under both. 193 A Book of Breathings made for the child Soter (possibly one of the

archon’s family) and studied by Jean-

François Champollion bore the inscription,

in Greek, hypo tēn kephalēn, “under the

head,” from which Champollion derived the

word “hypocephalus,” by which all such

round head-cushions as our Facsimile 2 are

now designated. 194 As the concluding act of the Egyptian burial ceremony, a priest

standing by the coffin would read the Book

of Breathings, and then, just as the lid came

down, he would deposit the book under the

head of the dead person, exactly as if it were

a hypocephalus; 195 or, following alternate instructions, it would be placed “on the left

hand near the heart. ”196 One Breathings text was even meant “to produce a flame under

the head of the ba, ” 197 that being also the principal and peculiar function of a

hypocephalus.

Figure 4. Thoth holds up the written certificate, a Book of Breathings, as he introduces its owner,

Tanous, to Osiris (who looks like Anubis). The

Demotic caption above reads: “An image of a woman

before whom is an image of Thoth holding a document. An image of Osiris” (Papyrus Rhind II, 9

B.C.). © The Trustees of the National Museums of

Scotland.

Thus, though the Book of Breathings does

not contain the text of the Book of Abraham,

as we have seen, it does have direct ties

with the three facsimiles which Joseph Smith

interprets as relating to Abraham and which

belong to just such ordinances as Abraham is

supposed to have been involved in. Lest it

appear that we are stretching things beyond

the limit, we refer the reader to Stricker’s

lengthy discussion showing how the

Breathings rites belong to the celebration of

the death and resurrection of the god (the

Sun) at the winter solstice, which he

demonstrates with significant parallels from

early Jewish and Christian sources. “We ask

ourselves,” Stricker concludes, “whether

there existed in Egypt institutions

comparable to those of the Jews” —that is, with regard to human sacrifice of the

firstborn, as indicated by “the behavior of

Abraham with his son Isaac. ”198 It is, to say the least, an interesting coincidence that the

most thorough studies ever made of that

limited class of documents to which the

Joseph Smith Book of Breathings belongs

conclude by calling attention to a possible

relationship between them and the sacrificial

activities of one man among the ancients—

Abraham.

An Egyptian “Endowment”?

The scholars who have dealt specially

with the “Breathings” texts do not hesitate to

recognize in them initiation rituals. What the

Egyptians were looking for was not unlike

what the Mormons call an “endowment.”

The word endowment that was chosen to

designate the temple ordinances contains,

historically and legally, two main ideas: that of the bestowal of something valuable on a

person and “the permanent usufruct of such

goods in installments and upon the

fulfillment of certain specified

conditions.” 199 It is the greatest of gifts, but we cannot cash it in this life—it is only for

the “spiritual minded,” “having nothing to do

with temporal things” ;200 it pays off only at certain times and places and upon the exact

fulfillment of certain conditions. No people

were more willing to invest their means and

energies in obtaining an endowment—a hope

and a promise—than the Egyptians. The

purpose of the following study is to consider

what specific steps were involved in the

bestowing and receiving of such an

endowment according to the Book of

Breathings. How closely they resemble the

Latter-day Saint endowment the reader must

decide for himself, for from this point on we

intend to say nothing of the latter.

One may well ask why we bother with the

ancient Egyptians, a people who were

denied the priesthood. Consider well the

situation:

Pharaoh, being a righteous man,

established his kingdom and judged his

people wisely and justly all his days, seeking

earnestly to imitate that order established by

the fathers in the first generations, in the

days of the first patriarchal reign, even in

the reign of Adam, and also of Noah, his

father, who blessed him with the blessings

of the earth, and with the blessings of

wisdom, but cursed him as pertaining to the

Priesthood.

Now, Pharaoh being of that lineage by

which he could not have the right of

Priesthood, notwithstanding the Pharaohs

would fain claim it from Noah, through

Ham, therefore my father was led away by

their idolatry. (Abraham 1:26–27)

What was the “order” that this good man sought earnestly to imitate? Not the principle

of patriarchal succession, certainly, which

requires no diligent effort of imitation, but

simply acceptance. It was a procedure, a

body of law and ordinance; for when

imitated without authority, though with the

best intention in the world, it merited the

label of “idolatry.” Abraham has described

the nature of these idolatrous activities,

which were impressive enough to convince

his own father of their validity. He used the

familiar motif of Facsimile 1 as an

illustration of the rites; and this picture was

found on the same roll of papyrus as our

Book of Breathings, making it perfectly clear

that the ordinances of the latter are among the

idolatrous rites to which he refers. Though

unauthorized and corrupt (see Abraham 1:5–

14), they nonetheless began as an earnest and

devout imitation of the order of “the first

generations,” which the Egyptians venerated as the time of the pȝ.wt. Throughout the

world we find such imitations and

derivations, all corrupt and all unauthorized,

but all quite instructive. Since the best and

oldest of these are Egyptian, it is to them that

we turn for a check on the Prophet Joseph. Is

he making it all up? That is what we must

decide.

But, granted its mind-expanding scope, is

the Egyptian experience at all relevant to the

modern world? The answer is no; and

neither is Mormonism relevant to the

distracted modern world, which has no

concern with the things of the eternities and

will soon be forgotten.

Those who have sought to use the Joseph

Smith Papyri as a weapon against the

Prophet have uniformly relied on the old-

fashioned mythological interpretation of

everything, inherited by the Egyptologists of

the nineteenth century from the literary classical scholarship of another day. In all

their explanations either of Joseph Smith or

of the Egyptian sources, the American critics

have stuck faithfully to the old scenario,

apparently quite unaware of the

developments of the last half a century,

which, in the words of Professor Hornung,

have “wrenched our thinking out of its

accustomed, all-too-accustomed track” 201

and which today call for a fundamental

reexamination and reevaluation of the

records. 202

Notes

1. Grant S. Heward and Jerald Tanner, “The Joseph Smith Egyptian Papyri: Translations and Interpretations: The Source of the Book of Abraham Identified,” Dialogue 3/2 (1968): 93 illus. 1.

2. Discussed by Hugh W. Nibley, “The Meaning of the Kirtland Egyptian Papers,” BYU Studies 11/4 (1971): 350–54.

3. Klaus Baer, “The Breathing Permit of Hôr: A Translation

of the Apparent Source of the Book of Abraham,”

Dialogue 3/3 (1968): l09–34.

4. Nibley, “Meaning of the Kirtland Egyptian Papers,” 359–

99.

5. History of the Church, 2:348. [The author of this passage in the History of the Church is actually Oliver Cowdery. Even so, Nibley’s point may still be valid—

eds.]

6. Jay M. Todd, “Background of the Church Historian’s Fragment,” IE, February 1968, 40a–40g.

7. John A. Wilson, “The Joseph Smith Egyptian Papyri: Translations and Interpretations: A Summary Report,”

Dialogue 3/2 (1968): 68, it being written “in a hieratic hand coarser than that of Document B [a Book of the Dead manuscript].”

8. Bruno H. Stricker, “De Egyptische mysteriën: Pap.

Leiden T 32,” OMRO 31 (1950): 48. Jean-Claude Goyon, in Le Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279 (Cairo: IFAO, 1966), 1, finds the presence of rubrics in the Breathings P. Louvre N. 3279 “surprising.”

9. Cited in Dean C. Jessee, “The Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff,” BYU Studies 12/4 (1972): 371.

10. History of the Church, 2:349. This incident is described more fully later in this chapter.

11. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 2; see also 6.

12. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 3, 7.

13. See below, the portion of this chapter titled “Ties with Abraham?” pp. 28–30.

14. Heward and Tanner, “Joseph Smith Egyptian Papyri,”

92–98.

15. James Henry Breasted, letter to Franklin S. Spalding, in Franklin S. Spalding, Joseph Smith, Jr., as a

Translator: An Inquiry (Salt Lake City: Arrow Press, 1912), 25.

16. In Bruno H. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,”

OMRO 23 (1942): 31.

17. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 31.

18. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 35. The family names are all native Egyptian, with the sole exception of Soter.

19. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 30, 35.

20. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 30–31.

21. Described by Stricker in “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,”

31–34.

22. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 48–

49.

23. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34 (1953): 13.

At least, P. Louvre N. 3291 bears the rare name of Qaiqai and belonged to a Horsiese.

24. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 31–32.

25. In Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 31–32.

26. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 33–34.

27. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 34.

28. James R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955), 77.

29. History of the Church, 2:238–39.

30. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 31–32.

31. History of the Church, 2:349.

32. Clark, Story of the Pearl of Great Price, 77–78.

33. History of the Church, 2:348.

34. History of the Church, 2:349.

35. Clark, Story of the Pearl of Great Price, 77; and Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 31.

36. History of the Church, 2:349.

37. [Lebolo died on 19 February 1830; his lengthy will does not mention the mummies—eds.]

38. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 30.

39. History of the Church, 2:349.

40. History of the Church, 2:349.

41. History of the Church, 2:350.

42. History of the Church, 2:235 n.

43. History of the Church, 2:350 n.

44. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 35.

45. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 34.

46. Georg Möller, Hieratische Paläographie (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1912), 3:66 no. XVIII.

47. Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 49 no. 509.

48. Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 10 no. 115.

49. Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 6 no. 80.

50. Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 16 no. 179.

51. Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 30 no. 319.

52. Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 36 no. 379.

53. Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 50 no. 522.

54. Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 52 no. 537.

55. Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 30 no. 326.

56. History of the Church, 2:349.

57. History of the Church, 2:349.

58. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 46 and n. 1.

59. This system of classification is explained later in this chapter.

60. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 49.

On the Book of Wandering (Journeying) through

Eternity, see Hugh W. Nibley, “What Is ‘The Book of Breathings’?” BYU Studies 11/2 (1971): 164.

61. Jean Capart, review of “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,”

by Bruno H. Stricker, CdE 36 (1943): 265.

62. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 2.

63. Walter Federn, “The ‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts: A New Approach,” JNES 19 (1960): 245.

64. For example, Leonard H. Lesko, The Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), 1; Hans Schack-Schackenburg, Das Buch von den zwei Wegen des seligen Toten

( Zweiwegebuch) (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1903), 9.

65. Eberhard Otto, “Sprüche auf altägyptischen Sargen,”

ZDMG 102 (1952): 191–92.

66. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 250, emphasis in original.

67. Hellmut Brunner, Grundzüge einer Geschichte altägyptischen Literatur (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1966), 23.

68. Albertyna Szczudłowska, “Liturgical Text Preserved on

Sȩkowski Papyrus,” ZÄS 98 (1970): 80.

69. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 50.

70. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” 52.

71. Alexandre Moret, Du caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 116, 122–30.

72. Joachim Spiegel, “Das Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” ASAE 53 (1956): 341.

73. Spiegel, “Das Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,”

346.

74. Alexandre Moret, Le rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 178.

75. Aylward M. Blackman, “The House of the Morning,”

JEA 5 (1918): 162, emphasis added.

76. Gertrud Thausing and Traudl Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch (Papyrus Reinisch) der Papyrussammlung der Österreichischen

Nationalbibliothek (Cairo: Österreichisches Kulturinstituts, 1969), 3.

77. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 70.

78. Gertrud Thausing, “Die Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” in Mélanges Maspero, ed. Pierre Jouguet (Cairo: IFAO, 1935–38), 40.

79. S. G. F. Brandon, “The Significance of Time in Some Ancient Initiatory Rituals,” in Initiation, ed. Claas J.

Bleeker (Leiden: Brill, 1965), 41.

80. Jan Bergman, Ich bin Isis (Uppsala: Berlingska, 1968), 231; Claas J. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals: Enactments

of Religious Renewal (Leiden: Brill, 1967), 45.

81. Kurt Sethe, “Die Sprüche für das Kennen der Seelen der heiligen Orte,” ZÄS 57 (1922): 11; BD 114–16.

82. Hellmut Brunner, review of Untersuchungen zu den ägyptischen Tempelreliefs der griechisch-römischen Zeit, by Erich Winter, AfO 23 (1970): 118.

83. Brunner, review of Untersuchungen zu den ägyptischen Tempelreliefs, 118–19. [This is still true a quarter of a century later—eds.]

84. For some examples, see Nibley, “What Is ‘The Book of Breathings’?” 175–79.

85. Paul Barguet, Le Livre des Morts des anciens égyptiens (Paris: Cerf, 1967), 24–25, citing BD 18–19, 72, 135, 163. On general opposition to the initiation thesis, see Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 6.

86. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 25.

87. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 247.

88. For a treatment of this theme, see Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 92–120.

89. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 89. The temple rites themselves are “a symbolic repetition of the coronation,” according to Wolfgang Helck, Die Ritualszenen auf der

Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II. in Karnak (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1968), 1:74.

90. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 46.

91. Paul Barguet, review of The Pyramid of Unas: Texts Translated with Commentary, by Alexandre Piankoff,

RHR 177 (1970): 67; Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 88–89; Peter Munro, “Bemerkungen zu einem Sedfest-Relief in der Stadtmauer von Kairo,” ZÄS 86 (1961): 73.

92. François Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” ASAE 51 (1951): 399–400.

93. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 37 (1956): 49–

56; cf. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34

(1953): 13–17.

94. Erik Hornung, Geschichte als Fest (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1966), 19.

95. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 50.

96. Philippe Derchain, Le Papyrus Salt 825 (B.M. 10051): Rituel pour la conservation de la vie en Égypte (Brussels: Palais des Académies, 1965), 1:3.

97. Erik Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen (Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1968), 8–11.

98. BD 54–59.

99. Eberhard Otto, Gott und Mensch nach den ägyptischen Tempelinschriften der griechisch-römischen Zeit (Heidelberg: Winter, 1964), 54.

100. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 186–93.

101. Hermann Junker, Die Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien nach den Inschriften von Dendera, Edfu und Philae (Vienna: Hölder, 1910), 2.

102. Otto, Gott und Mensch, 149–52, 159–61.

103. These and other pertinent quotations appear with appropriate citations in Georges Posener, De la divinité du pharaon (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1960), 66.

104. Theodor Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris (Prague: Orientalisches Institut, 1940–41), 2:111.

105. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:141.

106. Émile Chassinat, “La mise à mort rituelle d’Apis,” RT

38 (1916–17): 44–45.

107. Walter Wreszinski, “Das Buch vom Durchwandeln der Ewigkeit nach einer Stele im Vatikan,” ZÄS 45 (1908–9): 111; cf. 112, 115–17, 122.

108. Alexandre Piankoff, “Le Livre des Quererts,” BIFAO

41 (1942): 9.

109. Piankoff, “Le Livre des Quererts,” BIFAO 42 (1944): 33.

110. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis, 1:81–82.

111. Piankoff, “Le Livre des Quererts,” BIFAO 41 (1942): 7

and pls. 1–3.

112. Piankoff, “Le Livre des Quererts,” BIFAO 43 (1945): 19.

113. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis, 2:151.

114. Wb 4:171–74.

115. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 186, 190.

116. CT 80, in Adriaan de Buck, The Egyptian Coffin Texts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935–61), 2:35–

36.

117. Wreszinski, “Buch vom Durchwandeln der Ewigkeit,”

115.

118. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 198–205.

119. Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zu altägyptischen Mysterienspielen (1928; reprint, Hildesheim: Olms,

1964), 73 line 64.

120. Sethe, Dramatische Texte zu altägyptischen Mysterienspielen, 76.

121. Eberhard Otto, “Das ‘goldene Zeitalter’ in einem ägyptischen Text,” in REHR, 103.

122. Otto, “Das ‘goldene Zeitalter’ in einem ägyptischen Text,” 103.

123. CT 162, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:395–99.

124. CT 167, 169–72, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:21, 30, 32, 40–46.

125. The word ḫm, examined by Victor Loret, in “La racine ḫm,” RT 14 (1893): 106–20.

126. Discussed by Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis, 1:46.

127. Cited in Max Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos: Ein Beitrag zur ägyptischen Religions- und Literaturgeschichte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929), 10.

128. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd rev. ed.

(Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1957), 514, sign-list T22.

129. Constant de Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,” CdE 36 (1961): 58, notes this common concept.

130. Wb 4:172–73.

131. Winfried Barta, “Zum Goldnamen der ägyptischen Könige im Alten Reich,” ZÄS 95 (1969): 88.

132. Wreszinski, “Buch vom Durchwandeln der Ewigkeit,”

115, 119.

133. Giuseppe Botti, “Il Libro del Respirare e un suo nuovo

esemplare nel papiro demotico N. 766 del Museo Egizio di Torino,” JEA 54 (1968): 223.

134. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 47. The Breathings text P. Leiden T 32 can, “along with Pap.

Bremner Rhind,…be designated as the most outstanding homogeneous source of information on Greco-Roman

Hieratic writing”; Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,”

OMRO 31 (1950): 48.

135. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 51–53.

136. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Dead: Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, Ȧnhai, Kerāsher and

Netchemet (London: British Museum, 1899), 33.

137. Thus Turin P. Demotico N. 766, in Botti, “Il Libro del Respirare,” 225, is Memphite in content, and the

facsimiles of the JSP repeatedly refer to Heliopolis.

138. Botti, “Il Libro del Respirare,” 223.

139. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 52–53.

140. E. A. E. Reymond, review of Le temple d’Esna: Esna III, by Serge Sauneron, BiOr 28 (1971): 319.

141. Dieter Müller, “I Am Isis,” review of Ich bin Isis, by Jan Bergman, OLZ 67 (1972): 130.

142. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 51.

143. Vilmos Wessetzky, review of Untersuchungen zu den ägyptischen Tempelreliefs der griechisch-römischen Zeit, by Erich Winter, OLZ 66 (1971): 459.

144. Wessetzky, review of Untersuchungen zu den

ägyptische Tempelreliefs, 458.

145. Eberhard Otto, review of Les inscriptions du temple d’Opet, à Karnak, by Constant de Wit, BiOr 28 (1971): 41–42; for others, see Nibley, “What Is ‘The Book of Breathings’?” 175–77.

146. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 51.

147. László Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 95.

148. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 82.

149. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 86; Budge, Book of the Dead: Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, Ȧnhai, Kerāsher and Netchemet, 33.

150. Nathaniel J. Reich, “An Abbreviated Demotic Book of the Dead: A Palaeographical Study of Papyrus British Museum 10072,” JEA 17 (1931): 86.

151. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 52.

152. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” 50–51.

153. Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte,” 99.

154. For references, see Nibley, “What Is ‘The Book of Breathings’?” 162–64.

155. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 11–12.

156. Erik Hornung, Das Amduat: Die Schrift des verborgenen Raumes (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1963–

67), 3:55; Siegfried Schott, Die Schrift der verborgenen Kammer in Königsgräbern der 18. Dynastie

(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1958), 341, 369.

157. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 344, 346–

47, 354, 365–70.

158. Wreszinski, “Buch vom Durchwandeln der Ewigkeit,”

122.

159. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 52.

160. Budge, Book of the Dead: Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, Ȧnhai, Kerāsher and Netchemet, 33.

161. Émile Chassinat, “Le Livre Second des Respirations,”

RHR 31 (1895): 316; Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N.

3279, 86.

162. Reich, “Abbreviated Demotic Book of the Dead,” 86.

163. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 43, citing Spiegelberg.

164. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:19.

165. Louis Speleers, Textes des Cercueils du Moyen Empire égyptien (Brussels: n.p., 1946), ix. P. Salt 825 is actually “a very mediocre copy of a more ancient ritual”

(see Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:133), containing older texts and ancient commentaries to explain them (see Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:135) and employed

“as a memory aid [ or mnemonic device] by a ritualist who knew his business” and who had access to other books indicated in his text, the latter being “nothing but a guideline through a collection of liturgical works which seems to have been abundant” (see Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:136).

166. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 76, describing that papyrus.

167. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 52.

168. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 41, of

Breathings texts in general.

169. Henri Frankfort, Ancient Egyptian Religion (1948; reprint, New York: Harper, 1961), 59. The Egyptian,

“unlike other people, always carried the shell of his egg around with him; … everywhere we find…

reminiscences of prehistoric times”; Kurt Sethe,

Urgeschichte und älteste Religion der Ägypter (1930; reprint, Nendeln, Liecht.: Krauss, 1966), 1.

170. Quotation is from Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:111.

The rites preserved in the Breathings literature are those which had been celebrated “for countless ages” by the priests; Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31

(1950): 52.

171. Philippe-Jacques de Horrack, “Le Livre des Respirations d’après les manuscrits du musée du

Louvre,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Philippe Virey and Gaston Maspero, BE 17 (Paris: Leroux, 1907), pls. 7–11.

172. Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:ix.

173. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:xi.

174. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 51.

175. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” 52.

176. Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte,” 95.

177. László Kákosy, “Probleme der ägyptischen Jenseitsvorstellungen in der Ptolemäer- und Kaiserzeit,”

in REHR, 68.

178. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 53.

179. Müller, “I Am Isis,” 118, 129.

180. Kákosy, “Probleme der ägyptischen

Jenseitsvorstellungen,” 68; Marc Philonenko, “La cosmogonie du ‘Livre des secrets d’Hénoch,’” in REHR, 109–10.

181. Matthew Black, Apocalypsis Henochi Graece (Leiden: Brill, 1970), 8.

182. For examples of this carryover, see the following articles in REHR: Françoise de Cenival, “Les associations dans les temples égyptiens d’après les données fournies par les papyrus démotiques,” 5–19; Philippe Derchain, “Le démiurge et la balance,” 31–34; Herbert Donner, “Elemente ägyptischen Totenglaubens bei den aramäern Ägyptens,” 35–44; J. Gwyn Griffiths,

“The Tradition of Allegory in Egypt,” 45–57; and

Kákosy, “Probleme der ägyptischen

Jenseitsvorstellungen,” 59–68.

183. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 41; Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 76.

184. Chassinat, “Livre Second des Respirations,” 314.

185. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 76. A Breathings text has been discovered among the tomb inscriptions of the famous Petosiris, in Gustave Lefebvre, “Textes du tombeau de Petosiris,” ASAE 20 (1920): 219–22; and a

“similar text” is P. Sȩkowski, in Albertyna Szczudłowska,

“Pyramid Texts Preserved on Sȩkowski Papyrus,” ZÄS

99 (1972): 25.

186. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 42.

187. Because of the gratifying uniformity of the class 2

texts, extensive collations of which yield only minor

differences, I confine myself in this study to the following important papyri: JSP XI and X; the Kerasher Papyrus (P. BM 9995), in Budge, Book of the Dead:

Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, Ȧnhai, Kerāsher and Netchemet, 33–38 and facsimiles; P. Berlin 3135, first column in Georg Möller, Hieratische Lesestücke für den akademischen Gebrauch (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1927–

35), 3:32, and second column in Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3: Tafel XI; P. Berlin 3030, col. 6, in Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3: Tafel X; P. Louvre N. 3279, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279; P.

Louvre N. 3284 (collated with P. Louvre N. 3166, 3158, and 3121), in de Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” pls.

7–11; and P. Louvre N. 3291, in de Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” pls. 12–13.

188. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 41–43.

189. Reymond, review of Temple d’Esna: Esna III, by Sauneron, 319.

190. In Jessee, “Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff,” 371.

191. Referring to Hugh W. Nibley, “A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price,” IE, January 1968–May 1970, portions reprinted in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:74–

218, 319–81.

192. See Hugh W. Nibley, Abraham in Egypt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 2000), 436–37 fig. 74.

193. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 83; Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 46–47.

194. Chassinat, “Livre Second des Respirations,” 317 n. 1.

195. Siegfried Schott, “Nut spricht als Mutter und Sarg,”

RdE 17 (1965): 86.

196. JSP XI 1/5–6.

197. Schott, “Nut Spricht als Mutter und Sarg,” 83.

198. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34 (1953): 13–17, and Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 37

(1956): 49–56; quotation is from p. 52. For a treatment of related themes, see Nibley, “New Look,” IE, January–July 1969, October 1969–January 1970,

March–April 1972, portions reprinted in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:163–218, 319–81.

199. [Source unidentified—eds.]

200. History of the Church, 5:2; 6:319.

201. Erik Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971), 251; English translation in Erik Hornung, Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many, trans. John Baines (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1982), 255.

202. Among others, Munro, “Bemerkungen zu einem Sedfest-Relief,” 74; Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 3; Brunner, review of Untersuchungen zu den ägyptischen Tempelreliefs, 118; Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II, 1:1.

Chapter 2

Reproduction and Translation of

Joseph Smith Papyri XI and X

Figure 5. Placement of the fragments of Joseph Smith Papyri I, XI, and X according to their relative position on the original scroll of Hor. The numbers on the top indicate the columns of the text.

Figure 6. JSP XI col. 1 (see color plate 2). ©

Intellectual Reserve, Inc.Column 1, Lines 1–2

Column 1, Lines 1–2

TRANSLITERATION

1 [… ẖ] nw 1 n py2 š wr 3 Ḫnsw

[. . .] ms. n 4 Tȝy-ḫy-bỉȝ.t5 mȝʿ-ḫrw mỉtty TRANSLATION

What to Do with This Document: Instructions

for Wrapping and Sealing

1 […] inside (of) the lake great (of) Khonsu

[…] born of Taykhebyt, Jusjpgied,

likewise

Column 1, Lines 3–4

TRANSLITERATION

3 m-ḫ[ t ḫf] ʿ.wy6 ʿ.wy=f ḥr 7 ḥȝty=f ỉw m qr-ỉs mỉ mḏ ȝ.t 8 tȝ š ʿ y snsn ỉr.n 9 nty TRANSLATION

3 after clasped his (two) arms upon his

breast being as wrap-

ped like a book ( or roll); 10 the Book of Breathings11 being written according to what is

Column 1, Lines 5–7

TRANSLITERATION

5 m sš.wwy 12 ẖnw bnr n-ỉm=s 13 m šs-nsw rdỉ.tw rmn

ỉȝby=f mtr14 ḥȝty=f ỉw ỉrw pȝ n tȝy=f qrỉs m gs 15 bnr ỉr ỉr.tw n=f mḏȝ.t tn ḫr

TRANSLATION

5 in (the sacred) writings (books) on both

inside and outside in linen (of) the king.

One places ( or is placed) his left arm

vicinity of his heart, this having been done

for his

wrapping on (the) outer side. If one makes

for him this book, then

Column 1, Lines 8–9

TRANSLITERATION

8 snsn=f mỉ bȝ[ .w] nṯr.w 16 r nḥḥ ḥnʿ

ḏ.t

TRANSLATION

8 he breathes like souls (of the) […] gods

for time and

eternity.

Figure 7. JSP XI col. 2 (see color plate 2). ©

Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

Column 2, Lines 1–4

TRANSLITERATION

1 ḥȝt-ʿ m 17 [… snsn] .w ỉr.t […]

m wḥmy 18 […] ȝḫ.t ḥnʿ ỉt=f 19 Rʿ […]

rdỉ.t ḫprw 20 […] nn n Wsỉr Ḥr mȝʿ-ḫrw

[…]21

ỉmỉ=k rdỉ […] ʿš s s nb 22 ȝḫ […] ḥḥ n sp

23

TRANSLATION

Nature and Purpose of the Book

1 Beginning of […]s which…made […]

anew […] the horizon along with his

father, Re, […]

to cause to happen […] things for the

Osiris Hor, Jusjpgied […]

Do not let any man read it! It is beneficial

[…] countless times.

Column 2, Lines 5–8

TRANSLITERATION

5 hy Ḥr mȝʿ-ḫrw ms.n Tȝy 24[…] wʿb pḥ.wy=k

m twr.t 25 ḥr-ỉb=k m bd [ …] mȝʿ-ḫrw ms.n Tȝy-ḫy-bỉ ȝ.t 26 mȝʿ-ḫrw m šdy.(t) twy nty

[ …] swʿb.tw=k 27 Wȝḏ.t Nḫb.t m wnw.t fdw.t nt grḥ wnw.t [… Tȝy-ḫy-bỉȝ] .t mȝʿ-ḫrw ʿq=k r wsḫ.t

TRANSLATION

Purification Rites

5 Hail, Hor, Jusjpgied, born of Tay[khebyt

…] with washing, thy back

with cleansing water, thine inward parts

with bd (soda) […] Jusjpgied, born of

Taykhebyt, Jusjpgied, in the (these)

standing waters of […] have made thee

pure Edjo ( Wȝḏy.t, Uto)

and Nekhbet in the fourth hour of the night,

[…] hour […] Jusjpgied, that thou

mayest enter into the broad Hall

Column 2, Lines 9–12

TRANSLITERATION

9 mȝʿ.ty 28 ỉw=k wʿb.tw 29 r ḫww […] Wsỉr Ḥr mȝʿ-ḫrw ʿq=k

r dwȝ.t [ m] w ʿ b wr sw ʿ b.tw=k [… ] 30 m wsḫ.t 31

Šw32 ỉw=k [ḥ r] 33 mȝ ȝ R ʿ m ḥ tp=f [ …]

[ ỉw ḥ] ʿ.wt=k ʿq=k r ȝḫ.t ḥnʿ Rʿ […]

TRANSLATION

9 of the Two Maats since thou hast been

cleansed from all defilement […] The

Osiris Hor, Jusjpgied. Thou enterest

into the duat in perfect (great) purity,

which […] have washed thee…in the

great Hall (Court) of Shu.

Rebirth

Thou art about to behold Re in his coming

down, […]

thy body (members). Thou enterest ( or that thou mayest enter) the horizon in

company with Re […]

Figure 8. JSP X col. 3 (see color plate 3). ©

Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

Column 3, Lines 1–3

TRANSLITERATION

1 […] Ḥr mȝʿ-ḫrw ms.n Tȝy-[ ḫy-bỉ ȝ.t…mn]

rn=k ḏd ẖȝ.t=k rwd 34 ḫr 35 […]

[…] ʿnḫ bȝ=k ḫr 36 Imn rn[ p …] ẖȝ.t=k ḫr Wsỉr snsn=k r nḥ[ ḥ …]

[…] snṯr 37 m ẖr.t [ hrw …] qs=k ỉrw 38 mỉ

qỉ=k ḥr tp-tȝ ỉswr=k 39 m […]

TRANSLATION

Creation and Resurrection

1 […] Hor, Jusjpgied, born of Tay[khebyt…

Abiding (is)] thy name, firm and enduring

thy flesh (corpse), hale (is)

[…] living is thy ba in the presence of

Amon. (Ever) youthful is thy body

(corpse) in the presence of Osiris. Thou

breathest henceforth for time

[…] incense as the requirements of each

[day… .] thy bones, like thy very

form(s) upon the earth: Thou drinkest

with

Column 3, Lines 4–7

TRANSLITERATION

4 […] sn.w ḥnʿ [… ḫ] w 40 tw=k 41 Inp ỉrw=f nḏ=k nn ḫsf [ tw=k]42 m rȝ.w […]

[…] sp-2 wr nb Ḫmnw sš=f n=k š ʿ snsn.w m ḏ b ʿ .w=f ḏ s=f snsn

[…] tw.t=k ḥr tp-tȝ m-m 43 ʿnḫ.w ỉw=k nṯry ḥnʿ bȝ.w nṯr.w ỉb=k ỉb n Rʿ ḥʿ.t=k

[…] Wsỉr Ḥr mȝʿ-ḫrw Imn r-m=[ k]44 rʿ

[ nb] m pr Rʿ wḥm=k ʿnḫ wp n=k Wp-

wȝ.wt

TRANSLATION

4 […] (offering) bread, along with […]

Anubis [gu]ards thee; he is ( lit. makes) thy security.

Preparation for a Journey: Learning and

Testing

4 There is no turning [thee] away from the

gates

[…] the Most High (twice great), Lord of

Hermopolis, has written for thee a book

of breathings with his own fingers so

that […] may go on breathing

[…] thy form (as) upon the earth among

the living, thou being deified along with

the ba s of the gods. Thy heart is the

heart of Re; thy

[… Osi]ris Hor, Jusjpgied! Amon (is) at

[thy] side constantly ([every] day), in

the Temple (House) of Re. Thou

repeatest life. Wepwawet reports to thee

Column 3, Lines 8–11

TRANSLITERATION

8 […] ʿnḫ.wy=k mdw=k m rȝ=k šm=k m

rd.wy=k ỉw bȝ=k nṯry m dwȝ.t

[… šr] šr.w n p 45 (ỉ)šd šps 46 m Iwnw nhs.tw=k rʿ nb mȝ ȝ=k nȝ stw.t 47

[…]. w n ʿnḫ dỉ=f ỉr.t=sn […] ḫpr 48 […]

ḏ bȝ.wt=k pr=k r tȝ r ʿ nb rdỉ.tw n=k š ʿ

[…] nḏ.w=k snsn.w=k ỉm=s mỉ Rʿ mȝ ȝ

ỉr.t=k stw.t Itn ḏd.w mȝʿ.t n=k 49

TRANSLATION

Opening of the Mouth Fragment

8 […] thy (two) ears, thou speakest with thy

mouth, thou walkest with thy two legs. Thy

ba is deified in the duat.

Introduction to a New Life

[…] rustlings (whisperings) of the most

noble ished-tree in Heliopolis (when)

thou awakenest every day (and) seest

( or upon beholding) the ray(s)

[…]s of life, he causes thee to begin

(make) breathing thy coffin and come up

to earth every day. There is given to thee

the book

[…] thy protections, thou breathest by it

like Re (when) thine eye beholds the

rays of Aton. They call thee ( or they

refer to thee as) Maat

Column 3, Lines 12–13

TRANSLITERATION

12 [… ỉnḏ] ỉt=f […] Ḥr Bḥdty 50 ẖnm.n=f ḏ.t=k nṯr.ty=fy 51 bȝ=k mỉ ỉrw nṯr.w nb bȝ

n Rʿ ḥr sʿnḫ

[… ms] ty=k hy Wsỉr Ḥr mȝʿ-ḫrw ms.n

Tȝy-ḫy-bỉ ȝ.t 52 mȝʿ-ḫrw snsn bȝ=k ỉw TRANSLATION

12 [… protector of] his father […] Horus the

Behdetite embraces (unites with) thy body

and deifies thy spirit ( ba) as all the gods do ( or in the manner of all the gods). The ba of Re is giving life

[…] thy (two) [nost]rils. Hail thou Osiris

Hor, Jusjpgied, born of Taykhebyt,

Jusjpgied. Thy ba breathes in (any)

Figure 9. JSP X col. 4 (see color plate 3). ©

Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

Column 4, Lines 1–5

TRANSLITERATION

1 […]

[…]

[ šms] =k Wsỉr snsn=k ḫnty 53 Rȝ-sṯȝw […]

m Ḏdw Ṯȝ-wr bȝ=k ʿnḫ m p.t [ rʿ] -nb […]

ʿ ȝ ỉb.w 54 ḥr ỉrw mk.t Ḥr Bḥdty […]

TRANSLATION

1 […]

[…]

Mounting to Heaven (Coronation Theme)

thou [mayest follow] Osiris and breathe in

Rostau […]

in Busiris of the Thinite nome (while) thy

ba lives in heaven all the time (every

day) […]

Great of Heart is providing (making) thy

protection; Horus the Behdetite […]

Column 4, Lines 6–9

TRANSLITERATION

6 ʿnḫ wḏȝ snb ỉw=k mn.tw 55 ḥr ns.t=k m tȝ-ḏsr […]

ḫʿ.tw m ty.t=k tw.t 56 m ẖkr.w=k sḏr.n=k 57

m ʿnḫ […]

r bw nb wbn Rʿ ḥr tp.t=k 58 mỉ Wsỉr snsn

[…]

kȝ=k ʿnḫ wḏ ȝ snb 59 swȝḏ.tw=k m šȝʿ.t

snsn šms=k Wsỉr […]

TRANSLATION

6 life, prosperity, health, remaining upon thy

throne in the holy land (Deseret). […]

Rising with the Sun

Thou appearest in glory in thy proper and

perfect form in thy full ceremonial

regalia, (which) you prepared while you

were alive ( or having made preparation

in life) […]

everywhere. Re shines upon thy high place

(as for) Osiris, that thou mayest ( or

mayest thou) breathe […]

Joining the Heavenly Company

thy ka, living, protecting ( or prospering) to flourish in ( or by) the Book of

Breathings. Thou art following Osiris

[…]

Column 4, Lines 10–13

TRANSLITERATION

10 nṯr.w ʿnḫ ḥr=k nfr ms.t=k rn=k rwd rʿ

nb […] ʿq=k 60 r [ ẖr.t] -nṯr […]

m Ḏdw mȝ ȝ=k ḫnty-ỉmnty.w m ḥb wg

nḏmy 61 sty=k m ḥwn.w […]

sʿḥ 62 šps hy Wsỉr Ḥr mȝʿ-ḫrw ʿnḫ bȝ=k m šʿy snsn […]

bȝ ʿq=k r dwȝ.t nn wn ḫfty.w=k ỉw=k m bȝ

nṯr […]

TRANSLATION

10 the gods. Thy countenance liveth;

beaujpgul (perfect) is thy form ( or are

thine offspring); thy name shall be firmly established ( or flourish) henceforward

(every day). […] Enter into the god’s

[domain …]

in Busiris to see the Chief of the

Westerners at the wag-festival. Pleasant

is thine odor as ( or among) the young

men […]

very Elect. Hail, Osiris Hor, Jusjpgied.

Thy ba lives by the Book of Breathings,

[…]

a ba. Thou enterest ( or Enter thou) into the duat; thine enemies do not exist, for

thou art a deified ba […]

Notes

1. H̱nw being a substantive ( Wb 3:368.17; 369) following the preposition r in the more complete de Horrack text (P.

Louvre N. 3284, in Philippe-Jacques de Horrack, “Le Livre des Respirations d’après les manuscrits du musée du Louvre,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Philippe Virey and Gaston Maspero, BE 17 [Paris: Leroux, 1907], pls. 7–11; see Adolf Erman, Neuägyptische Grammatik, 2nd ed.

[Leipzig: Engelmann, 1933], 284–85 §591)— r ẖnw pȝ š

“hinein,” “to the interior (midst, center) of the pool”—

could be followed by an indirect genitive, though “ẖnw is usually followed by the direct genitive” ( Wb 3:370.15).

Though the vaguely horizontal stroke, which also follows the combination “ẖnw hrw” in line 5 below, could be the preposition n in both cases, it differs from the other n s in the papyrus (e.g., in Khonsu). The de Horrack text, however, has n at both places. [Though the n differs from others in the papyrus, it follows a pattern of form and usage in Demotic where multiple forms of the same n are used in the same text. It probably should read ẖnw n py š n wr Ḫnsw “in this great pool of Khonsu”—eds.]

2. Erman, Neuägyptische Grammatik, 53 §122.

3. A variation of

wr, so read for reasons unknown. Alan

H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd ed. (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1957), 538, sign-list Z9. Another variant occurs at this place in the corresponding text of P.

Louvre N. 3284 6/2. The two small strokes between this word and the preceding water-ideogram are part of the walking legs. See Georg Möller, Hieratische

Paläographie (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1927–36), 3:11 no.

120. [What looks to be two small strokes is probably an n, which would follow the grammar of adjectives known from both Demotic and Coptic—eds.]

4. For the otiose -t, see Erman, Neuägyptische Grammatik, 12 §21.

5. [Nibley, following Baer and others, read this name as Tȝy-

ḫby.t. Research has since proven Baer’s reading to be erroneous. The correct reading is Tȝy-ḫy-bỉȝ.t, Greek Chibois, which means not “the dancer” but “she of high character.” For discussion, see Herman de Meulenaere,

“Quatre noms propres de basse époque,” BIFAO 55

(1955): 147–48; Didier Devauchelle, “A propos du

papyrus de Genève D 229,” Enchoria 8/2 (1978): 73–75; Erich Lüddeckens and Heinz-Josef Thissen,

Demotisches Namenbuch, 17 Lieferungen (Wiesbaden:

Reichert, 1980–2000), 14:1081; Jan Quaegebeur, “Le Papyrus Denon à La Haye et une famille de prophètes de Min-Amon,” in Aspekte spätägyptischer Kultur, ed.

Martina Minas and Jürgen Zeidler (Mainz am Rhein: von Zabern), 222 n. 56; Marc Coenen, “The Dating of Papyri Joseph Smith I, X and XI and Min Who Massacres His Enemies,” in Egyptian Religion: The Last Thousand

Years (Leuven: Peeters and Departement Oosterse

Studies, 1998), 2:1104 and n. 7. We have changed the reading of the name to the correct one throughout the transliteration—eds.]

6. The root of the verb is supplied by an identical passage in P. Louvre N. 3284 6/2–3; see below, ch. 4.

7. The face has been heavily retouched. [Nibley correctly noted the retouching; what he did not notice was that the scribe has written the Hieratic (and Demotic) number 2

over the ḥr-sign which, although it does not change the translation, produces ḫfʿ.wy ʿ.wy=f 2 r ḥȝty=f “grasps his two hands to his chest.” The change in the text

actually destroys the rection of the verb since ḫfʿ

normally takes the preposition ḥr rather than r; see Wb 3:272.11–12—eds.]

8. The damaged character can be read as ḥrw “outside”

(Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3:30 no. 326; Wb 3:146), or as bnr “outside” (Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3:30 no. 326; Wb 1:461.11) or as

mḏȝ.t “papyrus roll or book” (Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3:50 no. 522; Wb 2:192). [The reading of ḥrw “outside” can be ruled out as the word disappears after the Middle Kingdom and is replaced with bnr. The sign does not have the standard shape of the bnr-sign and so that reading also can be ruled out—eds.]

9. Baer assumes that the name of Isis has been “omitted by the scribe” at this point and renders the passage “and the Breathing Permit (which [Isis] made and has writing on its inside and outside) has been wrapped.” Klaus Baer,

“The Breathing Permit of Hôr: A Translation of the Apparent Source of the Book of Abraham,” Dialogue 3/3 (1968): 119–20 and n. 42. Parker ignores the ỉr.n

“made by” and renders simply “one wraps the Book of Breathings, which is with writing both inside and outside of it.” Richard A. Parker, “The Joseph Smith Egyptian Papyri: Translations and Interpretations: The Book of Breathings (Fragment 1, The ‘Sensen’ Text, with

Restorations from Louvre Papyrus 3284),” Dialogue 3/2

(1968): 98. In the confusion I would suggest an

economical emendation by having the scribe write ỉr.n

for ỉr mỉ since the writing of m for mỉ is characteristic of Breathings texts. See P. Louvre N. 3279 line 43, in Jean-Claude Goyon, Le Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279 (Cairo: IFAO, 1966), 47, where the emendation occurs twice (cf. ibid., 50 n. 1). Another characteristic is the changing of m to an n before a following labial (ibid., 13). Hence ỉr mỉ nty becomes ỉr m nty, which assimilates to ỉr n nty, as in our text, giving the very appropriate formula ỉr mỉ

nty m sšw “wie es in den Büchern steht” ( Wb 3:477), as indicated by the following line.

10. Wb 2:192.16.

11. Wb 3:419.

12. Wb 3:477. Cf. P. Louvre N. 3279 line 27, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 11 and 40.

13. N-ỉm=s is attested in P. Louvre N. 3284 6/5, instead of a possible ỉw=s m šs-nsw “it being on royal linen.” See below, ch. 4. [ n-ỉm= as a form of ỉm= is attested starting in Late Egyptian and is the standard form in use for Demotic—eds.]

14. Wb 2:171–72; Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3:8 no.

95. The double fingers are the sign of exactness also, as in ʿqȝ.

15. De Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” 136, confesses that he cannot decipher this line. Parker, “Book of Breathings,” 98: “this having been done at his wrapping and outside it.” Baer, “Breathing Permit of Hôr,” 120:

“The rest of his mummy bandages should be wrapped

over it.”

The s is here very strongly marked, and two variant readings supplied by de Horrack agree with the Joseph Smith text and show the word here to be gs, “side.”

Unique to the Joseph Smith version is the swirling sign

, which can be read either as m or mỉ. Möller,

Hieratische Paläographie, 3:18 no. 196, 49 no. 509), “on the outer side” or “like the outer side.” Other possible readings for gs are šs “linen,” ẖr=s “underneath it,”

psḏ=s “its back,” ȝw=s “its length,” the feminine pronoun referring to the book—all of which have possibilities in view of the corruption of the text.

The enigmatic sign following the cloth symbol can also depict a rope, linen, or a bag. Alan H. Gardiner, “Two Hieroglyphic Signs and the Egyptian Words for

‘Alabaster’ and ‘Linen,’ etc.,” BIFAO 30 (1931): 161–

83. All of these are relevant to wrapping or even to a recitation or formula. Georg Möller, “Zur Datierung literarischer Handschriften aus der ersten Hälfte des Neuen Reichs,” ZÄS 56 (1920): tables 1–3, following p.

40.

16. In this peculiar combination (Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 22), the scribe has written the flag symbols like reeds and the oddly looped plural strokes like a

conventional Ḥor = ḥr sign.

17. An idiom for the beginning of religious books of instruction; see references in Raymond O. Faulkner, A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1962), 162. Note that the official

beginning of the Book of Breathings does not come directly after the picture (Abraham Facsimile 1). If a text of a “book of Abraham” was attached, it would not have to be at that point either.

18. Redundant and improper y is a characteristic of Breathings texts. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 11; so P. Louvre N. 3279 44/36, where this identical form appears.

19. The tail of the genitive f seems to be faintly visible, and there is space for it.

20. The r of ḫpr(w) has been damaged. For this writing of ḫpr, see Erman, Neuägyptische Grammatik, 24 §49.

21. [Nibley did not read the end of this line: ḥȝp sp-sn ỉmn sp-sn “Hide it! Hide it! Conceal it! Conceal it!”—eds.]

22. The “parasite” -t is very common with nb; Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 11.

23. The end of the lines are found pasted upside down on the framed text of JSP IV.

24. [Nibley originally had a note here, but the previous publishers failed to include the text, and we do not have any versions of the original manuscript for this section.

Apparently he intended to jusjpgy the restoration of the name—eds.]

25. No distinction is made between the writing of the - t- and

-d-; Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 22, citing Raymond O. Faulkner, “Some Further Remarks on the

Transcription of Late Hieratic,” JEA 21 (1935): 49–50.

26. [Nibley read this name Rmny-qȝỉ, and included the

following discussion:] “Remeny is exalted”; cf. Rmn.y ʿnḫ, “Remeny is living” (Hermann Ranke, Die

ägyptischen Personennamen [Glückstadt: Augustin,

1935–52], 1:222 no. 16), or “Remeny is my support”

(Wb 2:419). Since rmny means to lift or elevate in ritual (ibid.), it could also mean “Qai is exalted,” or even “Qai is crowned” (ibid., 2:420), Qai being a much commoner name than Remeny (Ranke, Personnennamen, 1:332

nos. 4–24). Number 20 of this list is qȝỉ-gbȝ, “mit hohem Arm(?),” and number 21 is qȝỉ-ḏr.t, “mit hoher Hand(?),”

suggesting for Remeny-qai a possible “My arm is

exalted” (stretched out, upraised; Wb 2:418); cf. the very common “stretched out” arm of God (nātāh) in the Old Testament. [Nibley is following Parker, “Book of Breathings,” 99, who originated this misreading—eds.]

27. Erman, Neuägyptische Grammatik, 38–39 §83.

28. The lower part of mȝʿ.ty is supplied from JSP IV.

29. This -tw may be used for the -tỉ of the old perfective; Erman, Neuägyptische Grammatik, 155–56 §§328, 331.

30. The Two Maats is the subject; see P. Louvre N. 3284

1/18; see below, ch. 4.

31. The top of an m and the wsḫ.t symbol are clear, though the lower part of the fragment (upper left-hand corner of JSP VI) has been almost entirely cut off.

32. The scribe has transposed the w and the disk; see Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3:28 no. 306.

33. Lacuna; supplied by P. Louvre N. 3284.

34. At this place other manuscripts have sʿḥ=k “thy mummy,” which the scribe of the JSP seems to have

overlooked, leaving the sentence defective, unless a substantive preceded mn.

35. This can be the common rʿ nb, “every day,” symbol or, it is just possible, the common ḫr, “in the presence of,”

which appears also in the following line.

36. The ḫr is damaged but discernible.

37. The determinative (Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 490, sign-list N33) is clear, the bottom of the incense pot faintly visible. Where the JSP is destroyed, the others have a list of invocation offerings. Lists of food offered tend to show the greatest variety in Egyptian funerary papyri. The P. Louvre N. 3248 list is bread, beer, beef, poultry, water, libation, and incense. The JSP text is smeared and retouched.

38. Reads qȝỉ=k in P. Louvre N. 3291, but ỉrw=k in P.

Louvre N. 3284. Here the two are scrambled.

39. For sw(r)ỉ=k?—this particular word is a spelling stumbling block. Wb 3:428; Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 213 §279; P. Louvre N. 3284 has sỉw (though the -ỉw can be read -ỉr), while P. Louvre N. 3291 has sỉ-wr. Is the -ỉ- transposed or prothetic (Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 209 §272)?

40. Preserved in P. Louvre N. 3284.

41. Direct object; Erman, Neuägyptische Grammatik, 38–

39 §83.

42. Object supplied by other manuscripts.

43. Dittograph for either the m or the ʿnḫ sign. P. Louvre N.

3291 doubles the m and P. Louvre N. 3284 puts “the living” in the plural. Can be read here as either “among the living” or “in life,” i.e., “when thou wert alive.”

44. Confusion of rʿ with mʿ ? Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 132 §178; Erman, Neuägyptische Grammatik, 311–13

§§623–24. [The word here is actually the Late Egyptian preposition ỉrm “and”—eds.] For the reading of the last sign, see Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3:64 sign VI.

45. All the manuscripts differ in this passage. P. Kerasher (BM 9995) has the same spelling as the JSP, being a Greco-Roman form of pȝ

, Goyon, Papyrus du

Louvre N. 3279, 13, which duly appears in the other manuscripts.

46. As mounted, the papyrus has a piece here that belongs to another fragment of papyrus glued over the unsightly gap in this one, which extends to the next line.

47. For this spelling, Wb 4:331. The word is written out completely in line 11 below.

48. The ḫpr-symbol here seems to belong on another fragment of papyrus which has been glued on here to fill an unsightly gap. This would indicate that the hole in the papyrus was there when it was mounted.

49. P. Louvre N. 3284 and P. Kerasher have ḏd=w mȝʿ.t r=k, “they speak truth to or concerning thee,” while P.

Berlin 3135, p. 2, reads ḏd=w mȝʿ.t rn=k, and JSP seems to have ḏd=w mȝ.ʿt rn=k or n=k, the latter suggesting the ḏd=w.n=f formula, where the -w ending is a participle

rather than plural. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 295

§377.1.

50. Or “protected, reconstituted”; Wb 3:378; Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 202.

51. Redundant -t- (Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 12) or emphatic -t- (Constantin E. Sander-Hansen,

Ägyptische Grammatik [Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,

1963], 113 §426, 115–16 §433, etc.) in other

manuscripts; here a sḏmty.fy.

52. The only occurrence of the complete name. Its meaning is unknown (Ranke, Personennamen, 2:197). For the first element, see ibid., 2:79; for the second, ibid., 1:268. Cf.

tȝy nḫ.t, ibid., 2:119. [For the meaning, see above, note 5

—eds.]

53. [Nibley originally had a note here, but the previous publishers failed to include the text, and we do not have any versions of the original manuscript for this section.

He appeared to suggest that there were two possible readings for the hieratic sign, m or ḫnty, but only the latter is a possible reading for the sign—eds.]

54. Cf. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 77 §95. For more on the special epithet Great of Heart, see below,

commentary to lines 53–54, pp. 350–51.

55. Improper -tw as in the related ḥms(tw) in P. Louvre N.

3279 lines 49, 59, line 49 having much the same context.

56. Also means “complete, natural, pleasing, perfect”; cf.

Alma 11:43.

57. P. Louvre N. 3284, etc., continue wrs=k m snb “you

spend the day in health,” which suggests sḏr instead of grg, i.e., the rhetorical contrast between sleeping and waking, day and night. The sign, however, is not sḏr but grg.

58. Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3:6 no. 79; the de Horrack text, “Livre des Respirations,” 3 line 14, has a hill or house instead, the hieratic symbols for “hill” and

“house” being indistinguishable in Breathings

manuscripts. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 23.

The two words combine in tp-ḥw.t “roof” (Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 297). The

determinative here calls for a definite place or structure.

59. The two signs following the ka-symbol do not occur in the other manuscripts and suggest that the writer placed the usual ʿnḫ-wḏȝ-snb formula after the royal ka title from force of habit. The second symbol can be read wḏȝ(w) (Simeone Levi, Raccolta dei segni ieratici egizi

[Turin: Paravia, 1880], 36 no. 407), while the absence of one s following may be due to the well-known reluctance to repeat symbols, e.g., in ḏdw, in line 4 above.

60. Attested in P. Louvre N. 3291.

61. “Parasite” y is common.

62. The de Horrack version, “Livre des Respirations,” p. 3

lines 18–19, does not mention the youths, but has instead mỉ ỉmȝḫ.w, ʿȝ rn=k m sʿ ḫ.w, “as (of) the Venerated Ones, great is thy name among (or as) the Noble Ones,”

spelling out the words.

Chapter 3

Translated Correctly?

What Is a Translation?

To the often-asked question, “Have the

Joseph Smith Papyri been translated?” the

answer is an emphatic no! What, then, is the foregoing? A mechanical transcription—no

more. The hieratic text was mechanically

reproduced by photography, transcribed into

hieroglyphics by mechanically unimaginative

reference to Georg Möller’s and Simeone

Levi’s catalogues of signs,1 mechanically written in reverse by the use of a tracing

table,2 and transcribed into its theoretical English phonetic equivalents by reference to

Alan Gardiner’s sign-list; 3 finally, each word was matched by its modern equivalent

as indicated in the Wörterbuch, 4 while endings and particles were accounted for by

rules laid down by Adolf Erman and

Gardiner, 5 who devoted their lives to making Egyptian texts translatable by infallible,

automatic rules. What we have is a

transmission rather than a translation of the text; and such transmissions, as Giorgio de

Santillana and Hertha von Dechend note,

“need in no way imply ‘understanding.’” 6

Today, those soliciting the aid of the

computer find themselves forced to speak

with a precision which philology in the past

could always evade and, as a result, must

confess to drastic defects in modern

scholarly knowledge of Egyptian. Thus Rolf

Gundlach and Wolfgang Schenkel point out

that, so far, no one has figured out a way to

write Egyptian without hieroglyphics—

which means that there are fundamental

aspects of the system which still escape us.

The hardest question of all for the Egyptologist, according to Gundlach and

Schenkel, is whether Egyptian writings can

really be understood by anyone but an

Egyptian.7 Go up to the man in the car (it used to be the man in the street) when he

stops at a red light and deliver this sober

message to him: “Osiris shall be towed

toward the interior of the great pool of

Khonsu,” which is the first line of Joseph

Smith Papyrus XI. If the man gives you a

blank look or starts an ominous muttering,

explain to him that the great lake of Khonsu

is “probably a liturgical designation of the

portion of the Nile that has to be crossed in

order to reach the Theban cemetery on the

west bank” 8 and that Khonsu, or Khons, is a youthful moon-god. When the light changes,

your new friend may proceed on his way

knowing as much about the first line of our

Book of Breathings as anybody else does—

namely, nothing at all. Though as correct and literal as we can make it, the translation in

the preceding chapter is not a translation. It

is nonsense.

For, what is a translation? The most

carefully thought-out definition is that of

Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff: “A

translation is a statement in the translator’s

own words of what he thinks the author had

in mind.” A little reflection will show that

this is the best, if not the only possible,

definition. Gardiner defines a sentence as

“any set of words in which he [the hearer]

can discern a reasonable intention on the

part of the speaker. ”9 A translation must therefore be not a matching of dictionaries

but a meeting of minds, for as the philologist

William Entwistle puts it, “there are no

‘mere words’…the word is a deed” ; 10 it is a whole drama with centuries of tradition

encrusting it, and that whole drama must be

passed in review every time the word comes up for translation.

The ablest Egyptologists have always

insisted that the main difficulty that confronts

them is not a matter of grammar or

vocabulary, but a complete ignorance of

what the Egyptian writer really had in mind.

“The most accurate knowledge of the

Egyptian vocabulary and grammar will…not

suffice to pierce the obscurity,” Peter Le

Page Renouf wrote long ago. “The difficulty

resides not in literally translating the texts,

but rather in the understanding the meaning

which lies concealed beneath familiar

words.” 11 Or, as Edouard Naville put it, “A sentence that is easy to understand

philologically, whose words and grammar

cause us not the slightest perplexity, may all

too often present a strange and even

burlesque appearance; we have understood

the form, but have not penetrated to the idea

that lies behind it.” 12 The Egyptian terms, Gaston Maspero noted, “always end up by

escaping us, dragging us in the direction of

our own present-day concepts.” 13 “Too often we know approximately what a sentence

means,” Erman admitted, “but its exact

translation is not yet possible in the present

state of our knowledge,” in which case he

takes refuge, he says, in the “ars nesciendi”

of frankly admitting that he does not know,

responding with a “‘das verstehe ich nicht,’

und ‘Gott weiss’” to whatever his students

may think. 14

Hence, “only by the unceasing reworking

of texts, by combining, trial and error, and

often also by daring guesses [is] it possible

to make any progress.…We are still obliged

to come to grips with linguistic problems in

every text that is not completely ordinary.” 15

But here even the cautious Erman speaks too

soon: is there such a thing as a “completely

ordinary” text in Egyptian? To this day there is no agreement on the meaning of the most

ordinary and familiar phrases in the religious

writings, such as mȝʿ-ḫrw and pr m hrw. 16

As an eminent contemporary Egyptologist

puts it, a “certain helplessness in the face of

these mythological records is unavoidable to

both laymen and Egyptologists,” 17 and he demonstrates his point by showing how

consistently the experts have misconstrued

what an Egyptian had in mind when he

employed various familiar words for

“sun. ”18

The most valuable of all clues to

understanding hieroglyphic texts has always

been, according to Gardiner, “the logic of the

situation.” 19 Until we know what the situation is, we are helpless; and the texts

themselves rarely contain adequate clues:

“These hoary strangers,” writes James

Breasted of the Pyramid Texts, “often remain

strangers until they disappear; we have no means of making their acquaintance or

forcing them to reveal to us their names or

the message which they bear, and no art of

lexicography can force them all to yield up

their secrets,” for theirs is “a fabric of life,

thought, and experience largely unfamiliar or

entirely unknown to us.” 20 Speaking of what have always been thought much easier texts,

Adriaan de Buck states, “It is difficult to

suppress a feeling of skepticism as to the

intelligibility of the B[ook of the] D[ead]

version, not so much of its separate

sentences, which as a rule are not difficult to

translate, but above all things of the plot and

story of the spell as a whole.” 21 “I may say frankly,” writes Rudolf Anthes of an

excellent popular edition of inscriptions in

the tomb of Tutankhamun, “that I wonder

what a reader not very well acquainted with

Egyptian religion may possibly get out of the

study of these texts and pictures. He may find in them scattered ideas which appeal to him

in one way or another, but he will hardly

know if his interpretations harmonize with

what the Egyptians actually thought.” 22

But is the Egyptologist much better off?

“One is often asked this very simple

question,” remarks T. Eric Peet. “Is it

possible to read a piece of Egyptian as

easily, as quickly, and as certainly as a piece

of Greek or Latin? The answer to this must

certainly be No.” 23 “Egyptian texts are never easy,” Peet explains elsewhere. “Every

translation ought to be accompanied by a

copy of the original…and by a mass of

critical notes…which repel the average

reader.” 24 But translations into English are properly meant for English readers who

know no other language. The Egyptologist

may be expected to read the original; what

the average reader has a right to is a

flawless translation here and now, and through the years various Egyptologists, by

pretending that they could supply such, have

beguiled the public and exploited its restless

impatience with devastating effect against

Joseph Smith.

The trouble is, in short, that the Egyptians

just don’t speak our language; every sentence

of theirs, from our point of view, is in a

technical jargon “which,” as Santillana

observes, “can hardly be understood if it is

not even recognized. Nobody can interpret

farther than he understands.…The most

refined philological methods in the hands of

expert philologists will yield only childish

stuff out of them, if childish stuff is expected.

Technical indications which would make

clear sense to scientists [or to Latter-day

Saints!] go unnoticed or mistranslated.…It

should be kept in mind that every translation

is a mere function of the translator’s

expectation.” 25 From this it would seem that no matter how well one knows one’s

Gardiner, or how many years one has spent

in Egypt, one may still be totally excluded

from the real meaning of any Egyptian text.

Many scholars have known Greek better than

any man alive knows Egyptian, yet to this

day Greek literature is full of texts that no

scholar even pretends to understand; is

Egyptian so much more obliging?

How Did Joseph Smith Translate?

What He Meant by a Translation

What we are saying is that there is still an

unbridged gulf, broad and deep, between the

real message of the Joseph Smith Papyri and

what purport to be translations of them. It is

ironic that the chief weapon against the

Prophet Joseph has always been the word

translate, a word which none of his critics has bothered to define but which, if carefully

considered, might lead to fruitful investigation.

What the philologists have always

overlooked is the positive contribution of Joseph Smith as a translator. He was a

translator in the grand manner, whose calling

was to convey the thoughts of the ancients to

his own generation by any and all means

which the Spirit put at his disposal. The

work of restoring all things and “bringing all

things together in one,” the last great

summing-up in which nothing should be lost,

entails a great meeting of cultures and

languages and requires, above all things, an

inspired interpreter. Joseph Smith’s proper

title is “Prophet, Seer, Revelator, and

Translator, ” the last referring to his unique and particular work and calling. He

understands “translating,” in its broad and

proper sense, as the handing on of any part of

the heritage of the past from one generation

or culture or language to another, in which the rendering of written texts is only part of

the process. Webster gives as the primary

meaning of translate “to bear, remove, or

change from one place, condition, etc., to

another; to carry over; to transfer.” Only

when we get to his seventh definition do we

find “to render into another language.…

Broadly, to carry over from any one form or mode of expression to another; to interpret

into another medium.” Even here, the idea of

a “literal” translation must yield to that of

interpretation, which is something quite

different.

It is in this true and correct sense that

Joseph Smith uses the word translation,

while his critics, by employing it in a more

narrow and limited sense, would ever turn it

as a weapon against him. “While we were

doing the work of translation, which the Lord

had appointed unto us, we came to the

twenty-ninth verse of the fifth chapter of John, which was given unto us as follows”

(D&C 76:15). Right here we can see that the

critics of the papyri are wasting their time.

The Prophet never claims to be operating as

a linguist—the translation is given to him.

We are reminded that he translated large

parts of the Bible in the same way. Why,

then, do scholars waste their time

manipulating dubious Egyptian texts when a

whole volume of Joseph Smith’s translations

lies at hand for comparison with countless

translations by competent scholars of the

very same biblical material? Take the

passage from John mentioned above by

Joseph Smith, for example; are there not

hundreds of scholars in the world today who

can translate it “from the original Greek”

better than Joseph Smith ever could? There

are, and that should settle the matter. Only it

doesn’t. For if Wilamowitz-Moellendorff is

right, how can any scholar ever be sure that he knows what John himself had in mind

when he wrote those words which have

baffled the doctors to this day? The

“Johannine mystery” is today as much of a

mystery as ever, and until we know just what

John meant by the words attributed to him,

we are in no position to claim that his words

have been correctly translated.

Only within comparatively recent years

have scholars such as Klaus Koch arrived at

an estimate of the Apocrypha that exactly

matches that of Doctrine and Covenants 91—

namely, that “there are many things contained

therein that are true, and it is mostly

translated correctly,” but also that “there are

many things contained therein that are not

true, which are interpolations by the hands of

men.…[Therefore] it is not needful that the

Apocrypha should be translated” (D&C

91:1–3). Here we are reminded that the

problem is not one of translating from one language into another, for the incorrect

interpolations are in the same languages as

the rest, and no knowledge of language alone

could produce a correct translation, which

calls for nothing less than the original

manuscript free of all errors, even those

made by the original writer; and it is

doubtful whether any such text ever existed,

for the hand is never completely obedient to

the mind. To put it bluntly, short of

revelation, no real translation of John is

possible, and that is why Bible experts today

assure us that all translations are tentative

and imperfect. But in section 91, translation

plainly means transmission, which, as we

have seen, is what a translation really is; we

are told that certain parts are not translated

correctly because they are false

interpolations, yet they are in the same

language as the rest and just as easy to

“translate,” as far as that goes—but that is not the point, which is that, regardless of the

language, they do not tell us what the original

author wanted to say. No one ever stated the

case more clearly than the Prophet Joseph

himself when he said, concerning 2 Peter 1,

that “the things that are written are only hints

of things which existed in the prophet’s

mind.” 26

In 1835 William W. Phelps speaks of the

Prophet as being “continually engaged in

translating an alphabet to the Book of

Abraham,” 27 using translation as the equivalent of deciphering—which it is.

Again, speaking of what he entitled the

“Explanation of the Above Cut” in the Book

of Abraham, he writes, “the above

translation is given as far as we have any right to give it at the present time”

(Facsimile 2), here identifying translation

with interpretation or explanation of a

picture in which there was no writing whatever. When we are told that “a few

leaves, opened by Mr. Chandler for

exhibition were shown to Professor Anthon

of New York and Dr. Mitchell of

Philadelphia, each of whom commenced a

translation,” we can be sure that those men

were not translating as they did from the

classical languages which they knew so well

—it was perfectly correct in this case to call

any attempt at interpreting an old document a

translation. 28 When we read in the eighth article of faith, “We believe the Bible to be

the word of God as far as it is translated

correctly; we also believe the Book of

Mormon to be the word of God,” we are

given to understand that the latter work,

though containing “the mistakes of men”

(Book of Mormon title page), is still

translated more correctly than the Bible.

Well, why translate the Bible at all? Can’t

we study Hebrew and Greek and read it in the original? We can, but again that is not the

point, which is that it is not only the English

Bible which has not been translated

correctly; the ancient texts have also suffered

in transmission. When Joseph Smith

announced in the King Follett Discourse that

some “old Jew without any authority” 29 had altered the first verse of Genesis, he served

notice that that verse as it stands cannot be

translated correctly, no matter how well one

knows Hebrew. By using the word

translation in one sense while Joseph Smith uses it in another, his critics have sought to

do him great damage. What he means by

translation is clearly apparent from a

revelation given while the Prophet was

producing the Book of Moses in December

1830: “Soon after the words of Enoch were

given [these are contained in the Book of

Moses], the Lord gave the following

commandment:…‘Behold, I say unto you that it is not expedient in me that ye should

translate any more until ye shall go to the

Ohio.’” 30 In what language were “the words of Enoch” which Joseph had been

translating? Where was the document? All

we know is that Joseph Smith did produce

—“translate” —a book of Enoch, which,

matched with many ancient texts discovered

since the Prophet’s day, must be accepted as

an authentic piece of the large and growing

corpus of Enoch literature. 31

It is also important to understand Joseph

Smith’s method of translation. Typical of a

carefully cultivated misunderstanding is

Wallace Turner’s statement to the world that

“examination of these originals has

heightened the confidence of some

Egyptologists that the Book of Abraham is

not a translation.” 32 What originals? We have just seen that there has been a serious

misunderstanding on this point: the Book of Breathings is not the pretended original text

of the Book of Abraham at all. If the Book of

Abraham were a hodgepodge of nonsense,

one might well look for its source almost

anywhere. But far from being nonsense, it

tells a story of Abraham which subsequent

documentary discoveries have confirmed in

detail; and this, along with the now well-

established tradition that Abraham did write

an autobiography about his Egyptian

experiences and that it was preserved and

read by his descendants in Egypt, makes a

very strong case for the proposition that the

Book of Abraham was indeed taken from

ancient writings. 33 If there is anything that the Mormons have always cried from the

housetops, it is that Joseph Smith did not

translate after the manner of the scholars; yet

now Grant Heward and his friends

repeatedly put this fact forth as a brilliant

discovery of modern science. Of course the Prophet did not translate in the manner of the

Egyptologists—he had neither their tools nor

their problems, for he had another method.

Consider the descriptive heading to section 7

of the Doctrine and Covenants: “Revelation

given to Joseph Smith the Prophet and Oliver

Cowdery, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, April

1829, when they inquired through the Urim

and Thummim.…The revelation [referred to]

is a translated version of the record made on

parchment by John and hidden up by

himself.” Here we have a translation which Joseph Smith did not make—it was given to

him, and he calls it a revelation; yet it was made from a real document, on parchment,

or treated leather, which John wrote with his hand and then hid away. We know from

discoveries such as the Dead Sea Scrolls

that it was the custom among saintly

communities of Palestine in John’s day to

write important things on leather and then hide them up in caves, so that is an authentic

touch. But the remarkable thing is that,

though the translation was made from a real

and tangible document, such a document was

never in the hands of Joseph Smith; it may

still be in existence in some corner of a cave

or a monastery or even a museum, but it is

plain that Joseph Smith never had it—he

didn’t need to have it or to know how to read

it, for the whole thing was given to him:

“Now this caused us to marvel, for it was

given unto us of the Spirit” (D&C 76:18).

The translation of John, like the book of

Enoch, was made from a document that was

never in the Prophet’s possession and may

indeed have been destroyed thousands of

years ago. Did he know the original language

of Enoch? Nobody does, but that makes no

difference when a translation is not worked

out but given to one by revelation.

When he first got the plates, the Prophet recalled, “I commenced copying the

characters off the plates. I copied a

considerable number of them, and by means

of the Urim and Thummim I translated some

of them” (Joseph Smith—History 1:62).

Mere copying was easy enough, and with

that he had no trouble; but translating was

another matter—for that he needed the

supernatural help of the Urim and Thummim.

This was not translation by normal methods

and was never proclaimed as such. As

everybody knows, the rendering of an exact

translation, especially from an ancient

language, is supposed to be an impressively

slow and meticulous process. But that is not

how he worked. “Joseph Smith dictated the

Book of Mormon, without apparent

hesitation, as fast as a scribe could write it

in longhand. There is no chance for error on

this point. The entire Whitmer family,

besides Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and Joseph’s wife, sat and listened, or had free

access to listen, to the record as it grew day

by day during the entire month of June,

1829.” 34 As his wife tells it, “I am satisfied that no man could have dictated the writing

of the manuscript unless he was inspired:

for, when acting as his scribe, your father

would dictate to me hour after hour; and

when returning after meals, or after

interruptions, he would at once begin where

he had left off, without either seeing the

manuscript or having any portion of it read to

him.” 35 “There were no delays over obscure passages, no difficulties over the choice of

words, no stoppages from the ignorance of

the translator; no time was wasted in

investigations or argument over the value,

intent or meaning of certain characters, and

there were no references to authorities. …

All was as simple as when a clerk writes

from dictation. The translation of the characters appeared on the Urim and

Thummim, sentence by sentence, and as soon

as one was correctly transcribed the next

would appear. ”36 And so, in seventy-five working days, between 7 April 1829 and the

first week of July 1829, a book of 264,000

words was turned out at an average of 3,500

words a day. 37

Plainly, this peculiar type of translation

depends on getting in the spirit and is not to

be accomplished by intellectual effort alone.

Of the Apocrypha the Lord told the Prophet,

“It is not needful that the Apocrypha should

be translated. Therefore, whoso readeth it, let him understand, for the Spirit manifesteth

truth; and whoso is enlightened by the Spirit shall obtain benefit therefrom; and whoso

receiveth not by the Spirit, cannot be

benefited. Therefore it is not needful that it

should be translated” (D&C 91:3–6). From

this it appears that all men, and not just chosen prophets, have a right to inspiration if

they are worthy, and that a translation is

really a means of helping those to understand

who are unable to get the Spirit for

themselves.

Nothing could be less like the normal

ways of scholarship than the inspired mood

and method by which the Prophet Joseph did

his translation. “In the darkness the spiritual

light would shine. A piece of something

resembling parchment would appear, and

under it was the interpretation in English.

Brother Joseph would read off the English to

Oliver Cowdery, who was his principal

scribe, and when it was written down and

repeated to brother Joseph to see if it was

correct, then it would disappear, and another

character with the interpretation would

appear. Thus the Book of Mormon was

translated by the gift and power of God and

not by any power of man.” 38 If all the Prophet had to do was to read off an English

text, why did he need the original characters

in front of him? He didn’t! “I frequently

wrote day after day,” Emma Smith recalls,

“often sitting at the table close by him, he

sitting with his face buried in his hat, with

the stone in it, and dictating hour after hour

with nothing between us.…He had neither

manuscript nor book to read from.…The

plates often lay on the table without any

attempt at concealment, wrapped in a small

linen table cloth.” 39 David Whitmer confirms this: “He did not use the plates in the

translation, but would hold the interpreters to

his eyes…and before his eyes would appear

what seemed to be a parchment, on which

would appear the characters of the plates…

and immediately below would appear the

translation in English.” 40

Are Gadgets Necessary? The Place of Intuition

Why, then, did Joseph Smith need a Urim

and Thummim, and why did he go through the

greatest pains and perils to get and keep the

plates if he didn’t really need them? Can’t

we forget all the hardware and be guided by

the Spirit alone? No, because God does not

want it that way. Whether we find it

agreeable and rational or not, God makes use

of both human agents and physical

implements in carrying out his purposes on

the earth, not because he needs to but

because he wants to help us help ourselves.

We are here, among other purposes, to learn,

and we will learn precious little if we get all

our solutions from the answer book; we must

have our faith tested and our skills

improved. Being here to gain mastery of new

dimensions of existence, we need practice

and training in subduing the strange and

difficult medium of the flesh, with which, thanks to the resurrection, we are destined to

live forever; we cannot ignore physical

bodies and physical things.

Let those who are still shocked at the

proposition that the Spirit works with and

through physical devices consider the visits

of the Lord to his disciples after the

resurrection. There he stands before them,

the source of all knowledge and the

wellspring of the scriptures themselves; he

could well push the dusty books aside and

admonish his listeners to heed him alone,

from whom all the books came in the first

place. Instead of that, “beginning at Moses

and all the prophets, he expounded unto them

in all the scriptures the things concerning

himself” (Luke 24:27); among the Nephites

he called for the records and personally

inspected them for errors and omissions,

admonishing the people to spend their days

reading the words of a prophet who had been dead for seven hundred years, “for great are

the words of Isaiah” (3 Nephi 23:1)! If the

Holy Ghost “bring[s] all things to [our]

remembrance” (John 14:26), one may well

ask, why do we need to record anything at

all? Because God has so commanded, “for

our profit and learning” (l Nephi 19:23).

We must not think that the Lord, in giving

his servants special devices to assist them,

was letting them off easy. He did not hand

them the answer book, but only a slide rule.

It takes far more formidable qualifications

and far more intense concentration and

cerebration to use a seer stone than it does to

use a dictionary; similarly, the existence in

our midst of computers does not mean, as

some fondly suppose, that mathematicians

and translators and genealogists no longer

have to think—they have to think harder than

ever. A Urim and Thummim, like a

dictionary, is only an aid to the translator who knows how to work it and may be

gradually dispensed with as he becomes

more proficient in his spiritual exercise.

Admittedly, translating with a Urim and

Thummim is not the normal way; it does not

require philological training, but training of

a far more exacting sort since, like the seer

stone, it shows “things which [are] not

visible to the natural eye” (Moses 6:36); it

operates, as Buckminster Fuller would say,

by the mind and not by the brain. 41 That requires even greater effort and discipline.

“When a man works by faith,” said the

Prophet, “he works by mental exertion…

instead of exerting his physical powers. ”42 It is the exertion of the mind, and it is the most

strenuous and exacting work of all.

Certainly, the documents with which Joseph

Smith was dealing could be translated in no

other way than by the Spirit. How can any

mortal ever know what the original first writer of Genesis had in mind save by the

power of revelation? And without that

knowledge, no translation is possible. It was Brother Joseph’s calling to interpret the

minds of dispensations other than our own,

and during the short time in which he worked

at it he covered an astonishing amount of

ground, handling huge masses of material

which could only be rightly understood and

explained by the power of revelation. In

fulfilling his formidable mission, he was

never bound to any particular method or text

or vocabulary or rules of grammar since they

are merely aids to any translator’s ignorance.

Every good translator will tell you that after

all the aids and implements at his disposal,

including his own long training, have been

brought to bear, it is, in the last analysis, his

own feeling for things that makes a

convincing translation—without intuition he

could never make it. If truly scientific translation were possible, machine

translation would have been perfected long

ago; but where wide gaps of time and culture

exist, such a thing as a perfect translation is

out of the question: in the end, it is the

translator’s own imponderable intuition that

is his claim to distinction. The most learned

linguists do not make the best translators,

and the uncanny skill of a Scaliger, Hicks,

George Smith, or Francis Ll. Griffith could

divine the meaning of texts before which

science and scholarship were helpless.

Even while they deplore anything that

smacks of the mysterious or defies cold

logic, no scholars are more keenly aware of

the intuitive nature of translation than the

Egyptologists. They constantly mention it.

No one has ever worked harder to achieve a

foolproof scientific method of rendering

Egyptian texts than Gardiner, yet his final

verdict is that “the only basis we can have for preferring one rendering to another, when

once the exigencies of grammar and

dictionary have been satisfied—and these

leave a large margin for divergencies—is an

intuitive appreciation of the trend of the ancient writer’s mind. A very precarious

basis, all will admit.” 43 Note that this most conservative of Egyptologists leads us right

to Wilamowitz-Moellendorff’s concept of a

translation. Writing nearly four decades

before Gardiner, Naville points out that the

assumption of a perfectly correct translation

on scholarly scientific principles can only

lead to frustration: “We have perhaps missed

the meaning because we have always broken

the expression down into component

elements and then translated each of those

elements literally, which has led us on the

wrong path.” Analysis can be destructive,

and this sets a definite limit on the claims of

scholarship. 44 The key to Egyptian is not to be found in a grammar book or dictionary; it

depends on knowing the Denkart (way of

thinking) of the ancient East, according to

Hermann Junker, which still eludes us. 45

How can we be expected to know what the

Egyptians had in mind when even the

Egyptian scribes had difficulty in

understanding what they were writing? 46

How can we escape the absurd conclusion

of many an Egyptologist, that the Egyptians

took a willful delight in the

incomprehensible?47 The only hope is to follow Professor Hans Bonnet’s advice:

every student should get “the feeling for the complex reality of the textual content.” 48

Yes, but how? By cultivating “an infinite

naïveté, a massive shedding of one’s own

intellectual habits,” is Philippe Derchain’s

answer. After learning everything that can be

known about the Egyptians, he suggests, one

then learns to “think Egyptian” by “imagining to oneself how [Egyptians] would react,”

taking care to be “sensible to the finest

nuances” of a text.49

That is all very well, but if there is

anything that cannot be acquired by study, it is an “infinite naïveté” ; and the only way

one becomes an Egyptologist in this world is

not to shed one’s own intellectual habits, but

to conform in all things to the most

conventional and regimented forms of

departmental behavior on earth. The

Egyptologist is the last person in the world

to meet Derchain’s requirements; but even if

one were to succeed, who could judge

whether he was really thinking like an

Egyptian? If “the problem for the translator

is, how to give the reader the feeling that he

‘was there,’” 50 how is he to do it if he was never there himself? It is more than a vast

gulf of time that lies between us and the

Egyptians—it is an insuperable wall of religion. “Religion is the Schmerzenskind of Egyptology,” wrote the great Erman at the

end of his life. “For half a century I have

wrestled with it, and how little certainty has

come out of it all! Everyone still invents his

own Egyptian religion.…One might say that

whatever we come up with is wrong,

because the task is simply insoluble. I have

never been able to escape from this

verdict.” 51 Santillana notes that the Wörterbuch gives thirty-seven different

terms for heaven “whose nuances are left to the translator and used according to his

lights. So elaborate instructions in the Book

of the Dead, referring to the soul’s celestial

voyage, translate into ‘mystical’ talk, and

must be treated as holy mumbo jumbo.” 52

To this day, no Egyptologist can do more

than pretend to understand the Book of

Breathings or the facsimiles to the Book of

Abraham. 53 Though by departmental courtesy we credit them with knowledge they do not

possess, it is safe to say that Egyptologists

are still without a foothold in reality.

Fortunately for us, the most forthright

statement on the subject of translating

Egyptian has been made by Bruno Stricker in

a specific reference to the Book of

Breathings: “The text is so pregnant,” he

writes, “that well-nigh every word, whether

substantive, verb, or even preposition,

possesses a hidden ( mystieke) content. The mere business of translating, under such

circumstances, becomes virtually

impossible. A translation can here be nothing

more than a caricature. ”54 Such is the predicament of any scholar who undertakes

to translate the Joseph Smith Papyri.

Method versus Results

It is, first and last, on the grounds of

method that Egyptologists have weighed Joseph Smith in the balance and found him

wanting. Once the method has been

discredited, it has been considered

unnecessary to look further into the results of

that method. But the Prophet has saved us the

trouble of faulting his method by announcing

in no uncertain terms that it is a method

unique to himself depending entirely on

divine revelation. That places the whole

thing beyond the reach of direct examination and criticism but leaves wide open the really

effective means of testing any method, which

is by the results it produces. The results in

this case are a formidable corpus of

purportedly ancient records which can be

readily tested as such. Yet to this day, the

critics insist on confining their efforts strictly to an exposé of Joseph Smith’s method,

while avoiding with almost hysterical

touchiness any discussion of the results. The

case of Joseph Smith versus the scholars thus presents a remarkable parallel to the more

recent experience of Michael Ventris with

his critics.

Some years ago a young English architect

by the name of Ventris announced that he had

decoded the so-called Minoan Script B,

which had baffled scholars for almost a

century, and invited all to put his findings to

the test. Instead of welcoming his

contribution with open arms, the most

eminent authorities condemned it outright,

for Ventris had presumed to aver that Minoan

B was related to Greek, whereas Sir Arthur

Evans, though he could not read it, had

announced eighty years before that it was not

Greek; moreover, Ventris was very young

and, worst of all, he who presumed to

question the most eminent scholars was

himself a mere amateur. To justify the out-and-out rejection of Ventris’s findings was

simply a matter of showing that his method was completely at variance with the practice

of the experts: if he didn’t use the correct

scientific method, he couldn’t possibly

arrive at the right results, could he?

In the young man’s defense, Professor

Leonard R. Palmer of Oxford pointed out

that the objections of the experts were really

quite irrelevant: “Criticism of his basic

assumptions, his methods, and the inadequate

nature of the script is beside the point.” 55

How so? These were the very things the

authorities pounced on in order to demolish

Ventris; if the man’s basic assumptions are

wrong, his methods unacceptable, and his

evidence inadequate, what more witness do

we need? Why is all that “beside the point”?

Because, Palmer explains, in producing his

translations, Ventris has “committed himself

irrevocably to a precise set of predictions of

great complexity” which can only be verified

or refuted by the discovery of texts unknown to Ventris when he made his predictions—

texts “which did not enter into the original

calculation.” 56 Once such texts are available, the test of Ventris is “simply the verification

of a set of predictions, regardless of the way in which they were arrived at. ” 57 Given such a perfect control, long syllogistic

arguments based on method are a waste of

time. When texts unknown at the time Ventris

laid down his rules were duly discovered

and confirmed his position on point after

point, the critics, as might be expected, were

prompt to “ascribe [any] ‘successes’ to pure

chance,” pointing out that since all sorts of

sound combinations were possible, “some

sort of meaning [could] be wrung out of any

such text. ”58 Such an argument, Palmer observes, impresses only those who have not

wrestled with these texts and who

conveniently ignore the possibility of

checking the probabilities mathematically in each specific case. In truth, each language

uses only a few countless possible phonemes

and disposes of the rest, so that if Ventris

uses a shotgun, he is not shooting at a solid

target, but at “space thinly peopled by

patterned constellations”; and if each pellet

connects, that can hardly be pure chance.59

The case of Joseph Smith and the Book of

Abraham provides a striking parallel to this.

He, too, offended basic assumptions of

scholarship—what possible relationship

could there be between the religions of the

polytheistic Egyptians and the monotheistic

Hebrews? the indignant Professor Breasted

asked in 1912. Joseph Smith, too, was a

youthful amateur, totally unacquainted with

the methods and materials of scholarship: his

methods were simply outrageous—no need

to look any farther for evidence to damn him.

And they never did look any farther. But in

publishing the Book of Abraham, the Prophet, even more than Ventris, had

“committed himself irrevocably to a precise

set of predictions of great complexity” ; he

told a story of Abraham that nobody knew

anything about in his day and threw in books

of Enoch and Moses for good measure.

Within the past hundred years, hundreds of

ancient documents “which did not enter into

the original calculation” of Joseph Smith

have come to light—all vindicating the

strange stories and teachings he has given us

about the ancient patriarchs. Like young

Ventris, Joseph let loose with his shotgun,

and his critics were quick to protest that with

so many guesses, some were bound to be

right by pure coincidence and common

sense; but in his case also, when hundreds of

buckshot hit their distant and illusive targets,

mere chance is ruled out. With the sources

now available (but unknown in the Prophet’s

time) to check his stories of Abraham, Enoch, and Moses, criticism of his basic

assumptions, methods, and documents as

unscientific and inadequate is indeed

“beside the point.”

Over the signatures of Heber C. Kimball,

Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith,

there appeared in the Times and Seasons a

letter dated 28 October 1840, a statement

which “breathes that spirit of liberty in the

pursuit of knowledge characteristic of the

work of God in the last days,” according to

the editors. “As we consider it perfectly

consistant with our calling, with reason and

revelation,” the brethren wrote, “that we

should form a knowledge of kingdoms and

countries, whether it be at home or abroad,

whether it be ancient or modern, or whether

it be of things past [or] present or to come,

whether it be in heaven, earth or hell, air or

seas; or whether we obtain this knowledge

by being local or travelling, by study or by faith, by dreams or by visions, by revelation

or by prophecy, it mattereth not unto us; if we

can but obtain a correct [view of] principle

and knowledge of things as they are, in their

true light, past, present and to come.” 60 Here is a clear statement of the principle

enunciated by Palmer: it “mattereth not”

what method is used, as long as one finds the

way to demonstrably valid and correct

information. The coming forth of some of the

Joseph Smith Papyri in our time is a

reminder that many channels of light and

truth are open to us and that the Spirit

chooses its own methods. Latter-day Saints

are constantly asking: How did Joseph Smith

translate this or that? Do we still have a seer

stone? Will we ever get the Urim and

Thummim back? What about the sealed parts

of the plates? Do we have the original text of

the Book of Abraham? Where is the Book of

Joseph?—etc., etc. With Palmer, this writer views all such questions as totally irrelevant

to establishing the bona fides of the Prophet.

They do not even make sense as expressions

of normal human curiosity since Joseph

Smith made it perfectly clear that the vital

ingredient in every transmission of ancient or

heavenly knowledge is always the Spirit,

which places his experiences beyond the

comprehension and analysis of ordinary

mortals.

But if the Prophet can never be pinned

down in matters of sources and method, it is

from the nature of the thing and not from any

desire on his part to escape examination. Far

from it—he was always inviting his critics

to put the inspired writings to all such valid

and established tests as may be applied to

any purportedly ancient document, and he

gave them a hundred times more evidence

than they would need to determine the

measure of their authenticity. If “it mattereth not” by what imponderable method Joseph

Smith produced his translations, as long as

he came up with the right answers, it matters

even less from what particular edition of

what particular text he was translating. It is

enough at present to know that the Prophet

was translating from real books of Abraham,

Moses, Enoch, Mosiah, and Zenos, whose

teachings now reach us in a huge and

growing corpus of newly discovered

writings. But instead of matching Joseph

Smith’s bold and explicit images of the past,

“regardless of the way in which they were

arrived at,” with what is now being found,

his critics can still think of no better attack

than to go on chanting their monotonous and

forlorn refrain: “He was no scholar, he was

not one of us—he did not use our methods!”

Notes

1. Georg Möller, Hieratische Paläographie (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1909–12), vol. 3; and Simeone Levi, Raccolta dei segni ieratici egizi (Turin: Paravia, 1880).

2. [For this second edition, we have typeset the hieroglyphs and have not reversed them—eds.]

3. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd rev. ed.

(Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1957).

4. Adolf Erman and Hermann Grapow, Wörterbuch der ägyptischen Sprache (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1926–63).

5. Adolf Erman, Neuägyptische Grammatik, 2nd ed.

(Leipzig: Engelmann, 1933), and Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar.

6. Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill: An Essay on Myth and the Frame of Time

(Boston: Gambit, 1969), 120.

7. Rolf Gundlach and Wolfgang Schenkel, “M.A.A.T.: Eine System zur lexikalischen und grammatischen

Erschliessung altägyptischer Texte mit Hilfe einer elektronischen Datenverarbeitungsanlage

(Projektbeschreibung),” CdE 42 (1967): 51, 58–59.

8. Klaus Baer, “The Breathing Permit of Hôr: A Translation of the Apparent Source of the Book of Abraham,”

Dialogue 3/3 (1968): 119 n. 39.

9. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 410, emphasis added.

10. William J. Entwistle, Aspects of Language (London: Faber and Faber, 1953), 4.

11. Peter Le Page Renouf, Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion as Illustrated by the Religion of

Ancient Egypt (London: Williams and Norgate, 1880), 176–77.

12. Edouard H. Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch der XVIII. bis XX. Dynastie (Berlin: Asher, 1886), 1:2–3.

13. Gaston Maspero, “Une formule des stèles funéraires de la XIIe Dynastie,” in Études de mythologie et

d’archéologie égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 1

(Paris: Leroux, 1893), 22.

14. Adolf Erman, Mein Werden und mein Wirken: Erinnerungen eines alten Berliner Gelehrten (Leipzig: Quelle and Meyer, 1929), 271, 281.

15. Erman, Mein Werden und mein Wirken, 254.

16. Of the second, Naville, after years of toil, regrets that he has “so far been unable to translate these three Egyptian words in a satisfactory manner” ; see Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, 1, 23–24. “The idea of Mâ∆rou has exhausted the efforts of Egyptologists from the beginning” ; see Alexandre Moret, Mystères égyptiens (Paris: Colin, 1913), 136–37.

17. Rudolf Anthes, review of The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, by Alexandre Piankoff, Artibus Asiae 20 (1957): 92.

18. Anthes, review of The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, 93.

19. Alan H. Gardiner, Egypt of the Pharaohs (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961), 24.

20. James Henry Breasted, Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt (New York: Scribner’s Sons, 1912), 90–91.

21. Adriaan de Buck, “The Earliest Version of Book of the Dead 78,” JEA 35 (1949): 87.

22. Anthes, review of Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, 92.

23. T. Eric Peet, The Present Position of Egyptological Studies (Oxford: Clarendon, 1934), 14.

24. T. Eric Peet, “A Historical Document of Ramesside Age,” JEA 10 (1924): 116.

25. Giorgio de Santillana, The Origins of Scientific Thought (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961), 11–12.

26. History of the Church, 5:401–2.

27. History of the Church, 2:238.

28. “The Book of Abraham” (a synopsis of a lecture by N.

L. Nelson), Academic Review: Brigham Young

Academy, Provo, Utah 1/6 (March 1885): 46.

29. Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 348.

30. History of the Church, 1:139; D&C 37:1.

31. See Hugh Nibley, Enoch the Prophet, CWHN 2.

32. Wallace Turner, “Mormons’ Book of Abraham Called Product of Imagination,” New York Times, 3 May 1970, 43.

33. See the long discussion in Hugh W. Nibley, “A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price,” IE, January 1969–

May 1970, portions reprinted in Abraham in Egypt, 2nd ed., CWHN 14:163–218, 319–81.

34. Nels L. Nelson, The Mormon Point of View (Provo,

Utah: n.p., 1904), 124–25.

35. The Saints Advocate, October 1879, quoted in Francis W. Kirkham, “The Manner of Translating the Book of Mormon,” IE, October 1939, 630–31, and in Francis W.

Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America: The Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Utah Printing, 1967), 195.

36. George Reynolds, The Myth of the Manuscript Found (Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor, 1883), 71.

37. Kirkham, New Witness for Christ in America, 220–27.

38. David Whitmer, “Address to All Believers in Christ”

(n.p., 1887), 12; quoted in B. H. Roberts,

Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: Century 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1930), 1:128.

39. Quoted in Edward W. Tullidge, Life of Joseph the Prophet (Plano, Ill.: Reorganized LDS Church, 1880), 793.

40. Interview in the Kansas City Journal, 5 June 1881, in Lyndon W. Cook, David Whitmer Interviews: A

Restoration Witness (Orem, Utah: Grandin, 1991), 62.

41. Richard B. Fuller, Intuition (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1972), 77–99.

42. Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), 72 (7:3).

43. Alan H. Gardiner, “The Eloquent Peasant,” JEA 9

(1923): 6, emphasis added.

44. Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, 23.

45. Cited by Werner Kaiser, review of Die Geisteshaltung der Ägypter in der Frühzeit, by Hermann Junker, OLZ

58 (1963): 340–43; cf. Edouard Naville, remarks

following Maspero, “Une formule des stèles funéraires,”

26.

46. See E. A. Wallis Budge, Egyptian Religion: Egyptian Ideas of the Future Life (New York: University Books, 1959), 41–42 ; E. A. Wallis Budge, “On the Hieratic Papyrus of Nesi-Amsu, a Scribe in the Temple of Amen-Rā at Thebes, about B.C. 305,” Archaeologia 52 (1890): 394; and E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Dead: The Papyrus of Ani, Scribe and Treasurer of the

Temples of Egypt, about B.C. 1450 (New York:

Putnam’s Sons, 1913), 2:469.

47. Hans Schack-Schackenburg, Das Buch von den zwei Wegen des seligen Toten ( Zweiwegebuch) (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1903), 9.

48. Hans Bonnet, review of Totenglauben und Jenseitsvorstellungen der alten Ägypter, 2nd ed., by Hermann Kees, OLZ 52 (1957): 403, emphasis added.

49. Philippe Derchain, review of Egyptian Festivals: Enactments of Religious Renewal, by Claas J. Bleeker, CdE 44 (1969): 82, 79.

50. Frank O’Connor, “Adventures in Translation,” The Listener and BBC Television Review, 25 January 1962, 175.

51. Erman, Mein Werden und mein Wirken, 279–80.

52. Santillana and von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill, 73.

53. [Some progress in understanding the documents has been made in the last thirty years—eds.]

54. Bruno H. Stricker, “De Egyptische mysteriën: Pap.

Leiden T 32,” OMRO 31 (1950): 54.

55. Leonard R. Palmer, “Mr. Ventris and His Critics,” OLZ

53 (1958): 116.

56. Palmer, “Mr. Ventris and His Critics,” 103.

57. Palmer, “Mr. Ventris and His Critics,” 104, emphasis added.

58. Palmer, “Mr. Ventris and His Critics,” 109.

59. Palmer, “Mr. Ventris and His Critics,” 111.

60. Letter addressed to “Brothers Robinson and Smith,”

Times and Seasons 2 (1 January 1841): 261; see also History of the Church, 4:234.

Chapter 4

A More Complete Text of the

Book of Breathings

Following is a reproduction and

translation of Papyrus Louvre N. 3284. 1 The highlighted passages of the Egyptian and the

bold words of the translated text are those

occurring also in Joseph Smith Papyri XI

and X, where they are found in the same

order as in the Louvre manuscript, showing

the Joseph Smith text to be an abbreviated

version of the longer and better preserved

Louvre document. Since the latter contains

the whole of the Joseph Smith text intact

almost word for word (the few differences

will be noted) and presents a fuller and more

detailed, as well as better written, account of

the ordinances, the analysis and commentary in the chapters that follow are based on

them. To simplify reference, the lines of

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 are numbered both

successively and by columns/lines (e.g., 48

[3/5]).

Text and Translation of Papyrus

Louvre N. 3284 with Variants from

Joseph Smith Papyri XI and X

Figure 10. P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 1.

Nature and Purpose of the Book

1 (1/1). Beginning of the Book of

Breathings, which Isis made for her

brother Osiris, to make his ba live, to

2. make his body (corpse) live, to make

young all his members anew; that he might

enter ( lit. join) the horizon along with his

father, Re, to make

3. his ba appear in glory in heaven in the disk of the moon, and that his body might

shine in ( or as) Orion in the womb of the

lower heaven ( nn.t) of Nut;

4. and to cause to happen the same things for the Osiris ( i.e., the candidate or initiate), the God’s Father and Prophet of

Amon-Re King of the Gods, Prophet of

Min-

5 (1/5). Amon-Re, Bull-of-His-Mother, upon

his great throne, Wsỉr-Wr,2 Justified [ JSP

has Hor, Justified], the son of one of like honors to these,

6. Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, 3 Justified. Hide it! Hide it! Do not let any man read it! It is

beneficial

7. to a man in the next world ( ẖr.t-nṯr) when he lives ( or that he may live) again, having been proven true (effective)4 countless (millions of) times.

Purification Rites and Entering the Temple

8. Speak the words (Recite as follows):

Hail, Osiris, God’s Father and Prophet of

Amon-Re King of the Gods, Prophet of

Min-

9. Amon, Wsỉr-Wr [ JSP: Hor], Justified, son of one of like offices, Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy

[ JSP: born to Tay[khebyt]], Justified!

Thou art pure,

10 (1/10). thy heart is pure, cleansed is thy

front with washing, thy back with

cleansing water ( twr + water ideogram), thine inward parts with soda and natron.

11. No member of thine causeth offense.

Purified is the Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-

Wr, Justified, Son of [ JSP: born of]

12. Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy [ JSP: Taykhebyt], Justified, in the (these) standing waters of the Meadows of Rest on the north side

13. of the Field of Grasshoppers. Edjo

(Wȝḏy.t, Uto) and Nekhbet have made thee pure in the eighth [ JSP: fourth]

hour of the night,

14. in the eighth [ JSP: fourth] hour of the day. Come thou, Osiris, God’s Father,

Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-

15 (1/15). tȝ.wy, Justified, that thou mayest enter into the broad Hall of the

Two Maats since thou hast been

cleansed from all defilement

16. and all sin. Stone of Truth is thy name!

Hail, God’s Father, Prophet of Amon-Re,

17. King of the Gods, Prophet of Min-Amon,

Wsỉr-Wr [ JSP: the Osiris Hor], Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy,

18. Justified! Thou enterest into the duat in a state of perfect (great) purity ( or by the great purification), with which the Two Maats have washed thee in the great

hall ( or court).

19. There has been performed for thee, yea,

there has been performed for thee a washing in the Hall ( or Court) of Geb; thy members have been purified in the Hall

( or Court)

The Creation (Resurrection) of

Man

20 (1/20). of Shu. Thou art about to behold

Re in his coming down, Atum in the

evening; Amon is at thy side, bestowing

upon thee

21. breath (of life), while Ptah forms thy

body (members). Thou enterest ( or that thou mayest enter) the horizon in

company with Re; they receive ( or that they may receive) thy ba

22. into the nšm.t-bark along with Osiris.

They deify (sanctify, exalt) thy ba in the House ( or Hall) of Geb; thou art justified for time and eternity.

Figure 11. P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 2.

23 (2/1). [Recite as follows:] Osiris, God’s

Father, Prophet of Amon-Re King of the

Gods, Prophet of Min-Amon, Wsỉr-Wr

[ JSP: Hor],

24. Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified. [ JSP: born to Tay[khebyt. ]]

Abiding is thy name, firm ( or enduring) thy flesh (corpse), hale is

25. thy mummy. There is no holding thee back in heaven or earth. Made to shine is

thy countenance in the presence of Re;

living is thy ba in the presence of

26. Amon. (Ever) youthful is thy body (corpse) in the presence of Osiris. Thou breathest henceforth for time and

eternity. Thy ba makes for thee

27 (2/5). invocation offerings of bread, beer,

flesh, and fowl, of libation water and

incense as the requirements of each day.

Thy flesh is upon

28. thy bones, made like thy very form(s) upon the earth: Thou drinkest with thy

throat, thou eatest with thy mouth,

29. thou receivest (offering) bread, along with the ba s of the gods. Anubis guards thee; he is ( lit. makes) thy security.

30 . There is no turning thee away from the gates of the duat. Thoth, the Most High (twice great [ different spelling in JSP]),

Lord of Hermopolis, comes up to thee, having written [ JSP: has written] for thee

31 . writings [ JSP: a book] of breathings with his own fingers, so that thy ba may go on breathing forever and thou renew

thy form

32 (2/10). as upon the earth among the

living, thou being deified along with the

bas of the gods. Thy heart is the heart

of Re;

33. thy members are the members of the

great god (himself).

34. Hail, Osiris, God’s Father, Prophet of

Amon-Re King of the Gods, Prophet of

Min-Amon,

35. Wsỉr-Wr, Justified [ JSP: Osiris Hor Justified], Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy,

Justified! Amon is at thy side constantly

(every day [ JSP adds: in the Temple ( or House) of Re]) engaged in ( ḥr, concerned

with)

36. renewing thee ( or thy renewing) in life.

[ JSP: Thou repeatest life.] Wepwawet reports (opens, announces) to thee the right road. Thou seest with thine eye, thou

hearest with thy two ears, thou speakest

37 (2/15). with thy mouth, thou walkest

with thy two legs. Thy ba is deified in

the duat, being about to ( r, so as to) make whatever transformation ( ḫprw) it desires.

The Garden Story

38. Thou makest the rustlings (whisperings, breezes, scatterings, splittings) of the

[ JSP adds: most] noble ished-tree in Heliopolis when thou awakenest

39. every day and seest ( or upon beholding) the ray(s) of the sun. Amon comes to thee bearing the breath(s) of life; he causes thee

40. to begin ( or make) breathing in thy

coffin and come up to earth every day.

[ JSP continues: There is given to thee

the book…]. The Book of Breathings by Thoth is as thy protection(s);

41. thou breathest by it every day [ JSP

adds: like Re] when thine eye beholds the rays of Aton. They call thee Maat

( or they refer to thee as Maat) in the presence of Osiris. They write the

42 (2/20). mȝʿ-ḫrw (Justified) formula

[ ideogram for speech or utterance] upon

thy body. Horus the protector of his father

[ JSP adds: Horus the Behdetite] protects

[ ḫw; JSP: ẖnm, embraces, unites with]

thy body and deifies thy spirit (ba) like all the gods [ JSP: as all the gods do, or in the manner of all the gods]. The ba 43. of Re is giving life to thy ba; the ba of Shu is infusing (uniting) thy two nostrils.

44 (3/1). Hail thou, Osiris, God’s Father, the Prophet of Amon-Re King of the Gods,

Prophet

45. of Min-Amon, Wsỉr-Wr [ JSP: Osiris Hor], Justified, Son of [ JSP: born of Taykhebyt] Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified.

Thy ba breathes in (any)

46. place thou desirest, thou being in the

place (seat) of Osiris; Chief of the

Westerners is thy name. It is Hapy the

ancient (the great), the inundation-god,

who comes to thee from Elephantine,

47 . filling thine offering table with offerings of meat and fowl. O Osiris, God’s Father,

Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of

Figure 12. P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 3.

The Long Road Back

48 (3/5). Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified! There come to thee the gods of Upper Egypt and

Lower Egypt to guide thee

49. in acquiring a full knowledge of the

eternities, that thy soul might live, and that

thou mayest follow Osiris and breathe in

Rostau.

50. Ḥȝpw-nb=s ( i.e. , the necropolis) and the great god protect thee. Thy corpse lives in

51. Busiris of the Thinite nome while thy

ba lives in heaven all the time (every

day). Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, 52. Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy,

Justified! Sekhmet hath power ( sḫm) over

those who conspire against thee.

53 (3/10). Horus the Great of Heart is

providing (making) thy protection; Horus the Rescuer [ JSP: the Behdetite]

is procuring (making) thy heart; Horus the

Seer is guarding

Triumph (Coronation)

54. thy body. Thou art ( or Be) firm in

possession of life, prosperity, health,

remaining upon thy throne in the holy

land (Deseret). Come thou, Osiris, God’s Father,

55. Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified! Thou appearest in glory in

56. thy proper and perfect ( twt) form [ JSP

has a different spelling: tyt for qȝỉ.w], in thy full ceremonial regalia, which you

prepared while you were alive ( or

Having made preparation in life), thou

passest the day hale and hearty, walking

about and

57. breathing everywhere. Re shines upon

thy cavern (house, hill [ JSP: high place]), Osiris ( or O Osiris!), that thou mayest ( or mayest thou) breathe and live 58 (3/15). by his rays. It is Amon-Re who

causeth thy ka [ JSP adds: living, protecting, or prospering] to live. It is

[ JSP adds: in or by] the Book of Breathings that causeth thee to flourish.

59. Thou art following Osiris, a Horus,

Lord of the Ḥenu-ship ( or of jubilations),

being as a great god at the head of ( or among) the gods. Thy [ P. Louvre N. 3284

omits “thy”] countenance liveth;

beautiful ( or perfect) is 60. thy form ( or are thine offspring); thy name shall be firmly established ( or

flourish) henceforward (every day).

Come to [ other manuscripts, including

JSP, have: enter into the gods’ [domain]]

the exalted ( or twice great) temple in Busiris to see the Chief of the

Westerners

61. at the wag-festival. Pleasant is thine odor as of the venerated ones [ JSP: as or among the young men]; great is thy name

among the [ JSP adds: very] elect (dignitaries, blessed dead, mummies [ the

determinative is doubled in the JSP]).

62. Hail, Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr

[ JSP: Hor], Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-

63 (3/20). tȝ.wy, Justified! Thy ba lives by

the Book of Breathings, thou unitest with the same ( lit. likewise [ JSP has: [thou unitest with] a ba]). Thou enterest ( or Enter thou! ) into the duat;

64. thine enemies do not exist, for thou art

a deified ba in Busiris. Thy heart is thine own, never to be separated from thee.

65. Thou hast thy two eyes, open always

(every day).

[Joseph Smith Papyrus ends here!]

The Fearful Passage

66 (4/1). Words to be spoken by the gods in

the following of Osiris: O Osiris, God’s

Father, the Servant (Prophet) of the God

Amon-Re,

67. King of the Gods, Prophet of Min-Amon-

Re, Bull-of-His-Mother, upon his great

throne,

68. Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified! Mayest thou follow ( or

Thou followest)

Figure 13. P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 4.

69. Re; mayest thou follow Osiris; may thy

ba live for time and eternity! Words to be spoken by the gods within the duat

70 (4/5). to Osiris, Head of the Westerners,

on behalf of the Osiris, God’s Father,

Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-

71. tȝ.wy, Justified, to open ( or to the end that there be opened) to him the gates of

the duat, to receive thee ( or that it may receive, the word it being crossed out) 72. in ẖr.t-nṯr. Grant that his ba live forever.

He has built mansions in ẖr.t-nṯr.

73. Let his ka praise his god when he has

received the Book of Breathings; grant him

ability to breathe (make breathing)!

74. An offering brought by the king to Osiris,

President of the Westerners, the great god,

Lord of Abydos. He makes invocation

75 (4/10). offerings of bread, beer, flesh and

fowl, wine and milk ( or ale), a sacrifice, a food offering (feast of abundance), an

offering of all things

76. agreeable to the ka of Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t,

77. may thy ba be hale, may thy body live; mayest thou flourish by the written decree

of Re himself. Thou shalt never know death (diminution, extinction)

78. or pain, even as with Re, for time and all

eternity!

79. O ( or Hail) thou who comest striding

forth from Heliopolis! The Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, is not guilty ( lit. to him 80 (4/15). is no doing) of light-mindedness

( or wrongdoing).5

81. O thou Great Assailant, who cometh

forth from the warrior city, Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born of

82. Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t-snb, hath committed no

robbery!

83. O Thou with the Beak, coming forth from

Hermopolis, Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-

Wr, Justified, born of

84. Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t-snb, hath not been guilty of rapacity (evil speech? oppression?)!

85 (4/20). Hail, (O) Swallower of the Eye,

who cometh forth from the Two Caverns!

The Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr,

Justified, born of

86. Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t-snb, hath not taken property (things) in a high-handed manner.

87 (5/1). Hail, thou Terrible-of-face, coming

forth from Rostau! Osiris, God’s Father,

Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, has not been contentious.

88. Hail, Rw.ty (Two Lionesses), coming

forth from heaven! The Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, did not do iniquity in hardness of heart.

89. Hail, Thou Whose Eye Is as Fire, coming

forth from Letopolis! The Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, did not do defilement.

Vindication and Triumph

90. O ye gods who are within the duat! Hear

the voice of the Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified, who has come

into your presence!

91 (5/5). There is no sin at all upon him; no

offense is held against him; no accuser

riseth against him. He liveth on Maat; he

feedeth on Maat. The gods are pleased

with everything he hath done.

92. He hath given bread to the hungry, drink

to the thirsty, clothing to the naked. He hath

made offerings to the gods, even

invocation offerings ( or funeral feasts) for those glorified ones (the deified

ancestors). There is not made

93. a report of any kind against him before

all the gods ( i.e., in assembly). (Spoken by the entire assembly?): Let him enter into

the duat, none opposing. Let him attend

(follow) Osiris, along with the gods of the

94. lower regions (caverns), being praised

among the living and deified among the

proven ones. Grant that he live; grant that

his ba may live; let

Figure 14. P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 5.

95. his ba be received into whatever place it chooseth; let his Certificate of Breathing

be duly recognized (received). Grant that

he may go on (make) breathing along with

this, his ba, in (?)6

96 (5/10). the duat, along with the making of whatever transformations ( ḫprw) his heart

may be inclined (given) to, along with ( or

like) the dwellers in the west. And grant

that his ba may go about whithersoever it

pleaseth, whenever it happens to be living

upon

97. the earth, for all time and throughout all

eternity. The end.

Figure 15. P. Louvre N. 3284 col. 6.

Culmination and Conclusion

[Joseph Smith Papyrus XI, column 1, starts

here.]

98 (6/1). Osiris is to be as one towed into

( lit. to within) the

99. great lake (pool) of Khonsu [ JSP

inserts the initiate’s name] after

100. he hath taken possession of his heart

[ JSP: [has clasped] his two arms upon his breast, being as wrapped]7

Figure 16. Vignettes with P. Louvre N. 3284 flanking column 6. As is so often the case, the vignettes seem to bear no relationship to the text accompanying

them. One can make a connection between the

vignette on the right and the text from columns 4–5 to its right, as both derive from Book of the Dead 125, but the connection between the vignette on the left, which is the standard vignette for this type of Book of Breathings, and the adjacent text is obscure. Réunion des Musées Nationaux/Art Resource, NY.

de Horrack8

Parker9

Baer10

after his

After he

After his

arms have

has

two arms are

been pla ced

repossessed

[fast]ened to

on his heart

his heart, one

his breast,

and … has

buries in the

one wraps

been

coffin

wrapped

101. the

101. the

101. the

Book of

Book of

Breathing

Respirations,

Breathings,

Permit

which

which is

(which

102 (6/5).

is written on

two sides

102. [Isis]

102. with

[ JSP: written

made and

writing both

according to

has writing

inside and

what is in

on its inside

outside of it,

the books

and outside)

inside and

out]

103. with

103. in

103. on

royal linen, it

royal linen

suten-cloth.

being placed

and placed

Placed under

at his left

under his left

his left arm

arm

arm

104. near

104. near

his heart, this

104. near

to his heart.

having been

his heart;

done

105. [ De

Horrack

writes in his

commentary:

105. the

“I have not

rest of his

been able to

105. at his

mummy

decipher line

wrapping

bandages

8 of the

and outside

should be

hieratic text”;

it.

wrapped

JSP: Having

over it.

been done

for his

wrapping on

the outside.]

Figure 17. P. Louvre N. 3279, a companion Book of

Breathings, including columns of text (1–4) and

vignettes (A–D). Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N.

3279, foldout at end. Reproduit avec l’autorisation de l’IFAO.

106. As for the one for whom this writing

is made ( or If he makes this book for him), he shall go on breath-

107 (6/10). ing along with ( vs. JSP: like) the bas of the gods for

108. time and for eternity.

Some Controls

In the foregoing text we have distinguished

six main topics: (l) the sacred purpose of the

text; (2) rites of purification; (3) the creation

and its equivalent, the resurrection; (4) a garden of abundance and delights; (5) a long

journey; and (6) its end in triumph and

exaltation. These are the main themes of the

mysteries everywhere. That we have not

here indulged in a forced interpretation of

the Book of Breathings should become

apparent to anyone who compares that

document with the six ritual texts presented

in the appendixes to this book: though

selected from widely different times and

places, all follow the same pattern as the

Book of Breathings. To establish the bona

fides of the interpretation more closely,

however, that book should be compared with

other Egyptian texts, of which there are

legion. Let us take a quick look at three of

these.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3279

Closest to home is a companion Book of

Breathings, Papyrus Louvre N. 3279 (fig.

17), which has been thoroughly studied by

Jean-Claude Goyon, who divides it into a

succession of related scenes. The headings

by which he designates these scenes are less

instructive, however, than the actual content

of each, which we take the liberty of

summarizing here. 11

Column 1

Invocation to Atum: The initiate calls

upon the god as head of the temple of

Heliopolis to assist the subject in meeting

the dangers and passing by the obstacles that

lie immediately ahead of her (the initiate is a

woman).12

Invocation to Ptah: The candidate

appeals to the creator-god, as “father of the

gods,” to bestow the breath of life on the

candidate and endow her with mouth, eyes,

limbs, and a strongly functioning heart—in

effect, it is the creation of man. 13

Column 2

Invocation to Atum-Re of Heliopolis: The

initiate requests that the gates of heaven and

the underworld be opened to the candidate

as she joins the sacred company of initiates,

the followers of Osiris, receiving from

Atum-Re a written certificate in the temple

of Ptah at Memphis, scene of the creation

drama, that her body may be joined to her

spirit ( ba) in resurrection. 14

Calling upon the Heart: The scene is the

garden of “the noble ished-tree” in the great complex of Heliopolis, at the New Year,

from which the subject sets forth in the rays

of the rising sun to make a tour of the new

world and begs protection from the

Combatants. 15

Column 3

Declaration of “Divine Identities”: The

candidate claims to be Horus, the royal heir and very image of Re—nay, she is the king of the gods himself, and as such, is immune to

death. 16

Invocation to All the Gods: They are to

sustain her on her harrowing passage through

the dark underworld, as a member of the

divine company. She walks steadily forward,

overcoming all enemies on the way, and

finally, “I mount up to heaven, victorious like

the god,” having achieved the use of all her

members forever. 17

Column 4

First Request to Hapy—“Water and

Wind”: The initiate asks for the water of

rejuvenation (resurrection) and the breath of

life, claiming premortal existence with the

gods and a share in the vigor of Hapy (the

Nile) himself. 18

Second Request to Hapy: The candidate

asks for a libation of fresh, running water of salvation, again claiming intimacy and

identity with the great gods of the creation.19

Conclusion of Papyrus Louvre N.

3279

Closing Statement: The heavens are now

open to the candidate, who enters into glory

with the imagery of the coronation, “coming

forth in the capacity of a great god.” The

closing line declares that the initiate now

possesses the three basic needs of all living

organisms: “The rays (light, heat) of Re, the

breezes (air, oxygen) of Amon, and the water

of Hapy.” 20

Like the Joseph Smith Book of Breathings,

this text is divided into four columns; there

are fifteen lines to a column, compared to

about twelve and a half lines in the Joseph

Smith text. The two documents are almost

exactly the same size, but a glance at the two

makes it instantly and almost shockingly apparent that the Joseph Smith document is

the work of an amateur scribe. Each column

of Papyrus Louvre N. 3279 text is adorned

with a vignette, but as Goyon points out,

these pictures do not match the

accompanying texts. 21 Nevertheless, they do follow the story if viewed in reverse. Taken

so, the first figure is the candidate herself,

surprisingly appearing either nude or in an

invisibly thin garment, sitting on a low settee

with lion’s feet (the sem-sleep) and holding out before her the sign of the breath of life.

That this is really the first figure in the whole

series is indicated by the fact that the other

three figures in the scene are all facing her

and are not turned toward the beginning of

the manuscript. Before her is a special

offering table, which is mounted on a stand

strangely emphasizing the bound lotus-and-

papyrus motif, the smȝ-tȝ.wy symbol of the

New Year; standing by the table is a bundle of structural papyrus stalks such as make up

the green booths in the year-rites, which here

also has the form of the hieroglyphic symbol

for “awake.” All this is indicative of the day

of creation.

Next, two arms reach out from the midst of

a tree or bush, holding flowing vases of the

type used in ritual purifications. Then comes

another tree, from or before which the Lady

Hathor, the Great Mother, is reaching forth

two flowing jugs from which water falls to

the roots of lotus and papyrus stalks, which

overhang another table of abundance (this

one without the conspicuous smȝ-tȝ.wy

motif). It is the garden of abundance. The

next scene, which baffles Goyon, 22 is dominated by a ritual portal before which an

enigmatic bovine figure (perhaps the dead

person herself) is crouched along with

Anubis and a figure resembling the Sokar-

hawk; both these crouching figures are symbolic in the Joseph Smith Papyrus of the

dark journey to follow. Next we see two

doors, having a total of seven panels (in the

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 manuscript there

are seven gates following the same

description), 23 guarded by rampant fire- and venom-spitting serpents. Each door is faced

by a monster holding a large execution knife

in either hand and wearing the two feathers

of justice on its head: obviously we are

being apprised of the dangers and tests

which the soul must undergo in its progress.

Finally, two “genies” dressed as sacrificial

priests stand before two closed doors; the

doors are about to be opened because the

two priests are lowering the large knives that

they hold in either hand. It is the final

barrier.

The Petosiris Inscriptions

But the Louvre manuscript is too close to home. Let us go back another four hundred

years to a family tomb in Hermopolis which

very much resembles the setting in which the

Soter papyri were discovered. 24 The most completely preserved funeral monument of

its time (ca. 300 B.C.), the Petosiris complex

(fig. 18) was a family tomb containing the

remains of several generations of an

illustrious priestly family whose head held

the highest civil and sacral offices in a

region dominated by one of the most ancient

and venerated temples in Egypt, that of Thoth

of Hermopolis. The parallel to the tomb of

Soter in Thebes is thus a striking one, but the

texts found in the Petosiris complex are not

on papyrus but are the original inscriptions

on the walls. Like the Theban counterparts,

they borrow freely from far more ancient

sources, including the Book of the Dead, the

famous Middle Kingdom story of Sinuhe,

and the Pyramid Texts, so that what we have

here is the ancient and ongoing tradition,

which makes the Petosiris theater very much

like the complexes of Rekhmara in the

Eighteenth Dynasty and the El-Bersheh tomb

of circa 1929 B.C. on the one hand and the

tomb of Soter on the other. 25

Figure 18. The Petosiris complex combined temple

and tomb in an unusual way. The great horned altar, over seven feet high, was at the left of the paved sacred way, leading to a typical Late Egyptian temple façade. The shaft opened on the center line between the pillars of the temple and descended twenty-six feet to the tomb crypt. The crypt contained the stone sarcophagi of Petosiris, his brother, and other

relatives.

Two things in particular command our attention in the Petosiris inscriptions. One is

the remarkable balance preserved—not only

in the inscriptions, but in the buildings of the

complex—between tomb and temple.

According to Gustave Lefebvre, the layout

“gives absolutely the impression of a

miniature temple,” with a true temple façade,

pronaos, avenue, and the most perfectly

preserved horned altar ever discovered.

Indeed, ancient pilgrims to the place from

300 B.C. to the time of the Romans called it

simply “the temple,” by which name it is still

known to the local inhabitants. 26 The inscriptions emphasize the activity of

Petosiris and other heads of the family as

living benefactors and active high priests in

the local temples of Thoth and Re. Balance

between tomb and temple is reflected in the

constant ambivalence which views the

afterlife on the one hand as a permanent

residence in the underworld and on the other as a celestial exaltation. Thus a pilgrim

leaves a note at the place: “I pray to

Petosiris, whose body is beneath the earth

but whose spirit reclines among the gods, a

wise one ( sophos) mingling with the wise

( Petoseirin audō to[n] kata chthonos

nekyn, nyn d’en theoisi keimenon; meta

sophōn sophos).” 27

Even more arresting is our second point:

the undeniable parallelism between many

passages of the Petosiris inscriptions and the

words of the Bible. While the moral teaching

of the Book of Breathings strongly suggested

the precepts of Moses and Christ to the

nineteenth-century scholars who first studied

them, Lefebvre, writing in 1924, expresses

surprise and puzzlement at discovering “a

series of philosophic-religious texts forming

an original whole ( ensemble) which invite

comparison, as much for their ideas as for

their form of expression, with certain passages of the Wisdom literature, the

Psalms, and some other writings of Hebrew

literature.” 28 Lefebvre matches up a score of biblical and Petosiris texts, pointing out “an

exact parallelism of words, phrases, and

thought,” as well as the identical form of

parallel sentence structure between the

two. 29 Perplexed by this, he cautiously suggests that “the editors of Psalms,

Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Wisdom” could

have learned from the Egyptians at

Hermopolis; but in the end he dismisses the

whole thing as a mere coincidence, which,

he affirms, only shows how advanced the

Egyptians really were in their religious

thinking. 30 But writing in that same year, Adolf Erman calls attention to resemblances

between sayings of a much earlier Egyptian

wise man, Amenemope, and the biblical

sayings of Solomon, which led him to

conclude that “there can be no question of coincidence here ( so kann doch hier von

Zufall nicht die Rede sein) . ”31 Though Erman was as disturbed as Lefebvre had

been by the surprising parallels, there can be

no doubt today that in the tomb of Petosiris,

as in that of Soter with its Book of

Breathings, we have a point of contact

between the Egyptian and Hebrew worlds.

The texts from both tombs reach back to the

very beginning on one hand and look

forward to the Judeo-Christian teachings on

the other.

The peculiar relevance of the Petosiris

writings to the study of the Breathings texts

lies in the presentation of the same ritual

motifs in the same order of succession. Since

the six major elements of the initiation

belong naturally and inseparably together,

they often mingle and fuse in a way that tends

to obscure their proper order: “the Egyptian

mentality,” wrote Henri Frankfort,

“considered it a particular nicety that

symbols should possess multiple

significance—that one single interpretation

should not be the only possible one. ”32 To make things more complicated, the rites are

so totally relevant to each other that each

assumes awareness of all the others in any

operation; hence they can be intermingled in

almost any combination, and frequently they

are all reviewed in miniature at each main

phase or step of the initiation, every such

step being a rite of passage in its own right.

This is complicated, indeed, but not

confusing—because it is all so perfectly

natural and rational. Consider the Petosiris

sequence in the order in which Lefebvre

uncovers the inscriptions as we proceed

through the “miniature temple” from the outer

gate to the holy of holies.

The Portal

Figure 19. On the east wall of the temple (fig. 18), a great procession of priests and officials offer sacrifice and carry offerings to the Opening of the Mouth of Sishu, Petosiris’s brother. The unusual wheeled

funeral bark carries the body to the tomb. The priest on the far right, dressed in a panther skin, pours waters of purification over the mummy, which stands before a typical pyramid-topped tomb against the side of a hill, though the actual burial site did not have these features. The artists struggled to combine the Hellenistic style of the lowest row of offering bearers

—who bring all the good things of the earth, including a baby elephant and other exotic animals—with the

stylized clarity of the ancient Egyptian tradition.

The visitor is greeted at the outer gate by

an inscription enjoining “all prophets,

priests,” scribes, and officiants to pronounce the name of Petosiris as they perform the

rites and to “think of my ka (eternal

spirit).” 33 The importance of keeping the written text in view is emphasized at

successive crucial phases of the operation,

for everything in the temple, including the

design of the building itself, must be done

“in conformity to the holy writing.” 34 “All scribes, savants, men learned in scriptures,

who come to this mountain shall read these

inscriptions aloud to the people who come

with them.” While carrying out the

instructions therein, 35 “the chief lector-priest” checks everything against the written

instructions he holds. 36 It is our belief that Joseph Smith Papyri XI and X may be the

actual prompting sheets used by such a

priest. “O prophets and priests of Thoth,…

when you see this tomb, recite the words

here engraved,…read the inscriptions,

perform the rites for me in my name.” 37 Thus the first words of the Petosiris inscriptions,

like those of the Book of Breathings,

proclaim the sovereign importance of the

written text in all that follows.

The Façade of the Foretemple

The inscriptions on the façade all deal

with purification rites: libation, censing, “the

ceremony of anointing the divine members”

of Petosiris, and the presenting of

bandelettes, or items of protective

clothing. 38 As in the Book of Breathings, the archaic purification rite called the Opening

of the Mouth is repeated at important

transitions, including the final recapitulation

in the crypt. 39 This vital ordinance, in which various members of the body from head to

feet are purified and healed of the blows of

death, 40 represents both resurrection and creation: “Thy mouth is opened by Ptah [the

Creator].…I open thy mouth, Sishu [brother of Petosiris], for I [Petosiris] am Ptah” (fig.

19).41

The Pronaos, or Foretemple

The walls of the pronaos are adorned with

reliefs showing artisans—metalworkers—at

their trade. 42 The Opening of the Mouth, representing the creation or resurrection of

the body, was commonly performed by

priestly artisans on statues (as substitutes for

the dead initiate), and in the Petosiris rites

the work is performed by the divine artisans

with a ritual chisel. 43 Here also the rites belong, as in the Book of Breathings, at the

wag-festival, or celebration of the creation.

Also, the occasion is marked by the

purification and promenading of Petosiris’s

statues with the announcement that he has

come to the place where he was born in the

beginning. 44 Petosiris’s proudest boast is that

he restored the temple of Re, “the place where Re was born at the beginning of the

world, when the earth was still surrounded

by Nun (chaos). It is the house of the cradle

of all the gods…for half of the egg was

buried there, and (from it) all creatures

issued forth.” “It is the place where every

creature was born.” 45

Here Petosiris is speaking specifically of

the temple garden, which was his special

concern: “I reinforced ( or protected) the

fence of the park, to prevent its being

trodden under the feet of the populace; for

vulgar people were walking around in it,

eating the fruit of the trees, and carrying off

its rushes in every direction, thus bringing

affliction on the land of Egypt.…For that

was the place where all things were born. ”46

In the pronaos, the creation (artisan) reliefs

and inscriptions are followed by the garden

motifs, depicting animals, both domestic and

wild (such as oryx and ibis), being brought to Petosiris, while the workers toil in the

fields and vineyards to bring in “all manner

of pleasant things that grow on the back of

the earth,” especially the aromatic plants of

Punt, the Egyptian Eden. 47 We see Petosiris disporting himself, while an inscription tells

of him sitting in a booth playing the chess

game which the hero in the Book of the Dead

vignettes and the Egyptian legends plays

with a lady in a green booth in some other

world. 48 We are also told that when Petosiris restored the temple garden, he also restored

the booth: “the Pavilion of the Goddesses, as

it is called in the Sacred Book, which

always faces east,” as well as “the sanctuary

of the Lady Hathor of the Sycamore of the

South” and that of Nehmetaouai, the Royal

Mother. 49

At this point Petosiris is joined with his

wife, who represents Maat, “the perfect

woman.” While “the creatures bring Maat to Petosiris,” it is she, “the perfect woman of

great charm,…holding out her generous hand

to all,” who is the universal mother, whom

all love and cherish. 50 Her special charge is the initiate himself, receiving food in the

Hall of the Double Maat and water of life

from the sycamore tree, “as for perfect

souls.” 51 As Nut, the heavenly mother, she offers him the food of the garden “with her

own hand” and the water that flows from the

sycamore as he sits at ease in the Field of

Repose.52 As Sekhat ( sḫȝt) , she brings all the wild game and fishes to his nets. 53 When he enters the garden, she greets him as the

sweet-singing Merit, his reception

committee. 54 It is she who brings him wine (the forbidden fruit of the Egyptians) as he

sits amidst “the magnificent trees of a

flower-filled garden,” 55 the garden that he enters as he passes from one world to

another, putting foot in the ẖr.t-nṯr, the “holy ground.” 56 One enters and leaves this world by a pleasant garden, even as one enters it by

Eden and moves on to the next world through

the anapausis or refrigerium of the early Christians.

The South Partition

One leaves the pronaos by a door flanked

by inscriptions of a totally different nature

from what has gone before. It appears at

once that in leaving the garden, one is about

to undertake an arduous journey, for which

the inscriptions provide preparation.

Petosiris speaks: “O all ye prophets and

priests,…come, I will cause you to be

instructed in the will of God: I will guide

you in the Way of Life.” 57 The Way of Life is the stock designation of the mysteries

everywhere. We are assured that everything

has been arranged “in accordance with the

holy book. ”58 There follows a poem which is entirely in the spirit of the first psalm of

David:

Come, I will instruct you in the Way of

God;

I will guide you in the Way of Life,

The true ( or right) way of him who obeys

God.

Happy is he who guides his heart in that

way!

He whose heart is firm in the Way of

God, whose existence on earth is assured,

He whose soul is filled with the fear of

God, great is his happiness upon earth! 59

Petosiris’s younger daughters add their

contribution: “Father, how good it is to walk

in the Way of God!” 60 And his grandson adds a pious voice to theirs: “It is profitable to

walk in the Way of God;…it assures a happy

life here, length of days, numerous children,

and a long line of successors; and he will be

as the glory of the sun at its rising! ”61 One cannot resist comparison with the Rule of

the Community (1QS) from the Dead Sea

Scrolls: “to all who walk in it—healing and

great peace, and length of days, and fruitful

progeny with all the blessings of eternity,…

and a crown of glory and a radiant garment

amidst eternal light.” 62 The Way of Life is, of course, compared to a journey—and indeed,

all who came to the shrine were pious

pilgrims: “Who walks in thy Way does not

stumble.” 63 “Come, I will guide you toward the Way of Life: you will sail with a

favorable wind, and without mishap reach

the harbor of the city of the generations. ”64 In the Book of Breathings, the breath of life is

also a favorable breeze helping the traveler

on his way through the dangerous waters of

the underworld.

As a ceremonial way, the journey must be

implemented by ordinances. Petosiris

reports how, after restoring the temples, he consulted the holy books and conferred with

the local authorities “concerning the manner

of organizing the ceremonies” of the same. 65

“All who come to this place:…Come, read

the inscriptions.” 66 “I will guide you in the Way of Life … and tell you what to do. ”67

The high priestly offices of Petosiris, his

father, and his brother culminated with

“penetrating into the adyton (the holy of

holies), performing the rites of his office

along with the great prophets,…chief of the

priests of Sekhmet ( meaning sacrifice), chief of the third class and fourth class (priests),

royal scribe, recorder of all the properties of

the temple.” 68 During the ordinances,

“everything I did was in conformity with the

holy book. ”69

But this is more than a religion of mere

forms and observances; all is vain unless the

heart is right, filled with love unfeigned for

God and man: “If one does evil in this world without being punished for it, he will surely

be punished in the next!” 70 “No one arrives at the dwelling of righteousness unless his

heart is perfect in doing what is right; in that

world there is no distinction between the

poor and the rich…when the weights are

balanced before the Lord of Eternity,…every

man being judged according to his deeds

while on earth.” 71 “I have arrived…at the city of eternity by doing good upon the

earth,” says Petosiris. “My heart was set

upon the Way of God from my youth to this

very day. By night his Spirit was in my heart,

and at dawn I was about doing what was

pleasing to him [Lefebvre here calls

attention to Isaiah 26:9]. I did what was right

and shunned iniquity [cf. Psalm 45:7], for I

knew the course ( lit. works) of life in which he is well pleased. I performed priestly

functions ( or purifications) in which his soul

delights. I did not consort with those ignorant of the Spirit ( or power) of God [cf. Proverbs 1:15; 24:1] but trusted in ( lit. leaned upon) those who did his will ( lit. who did loyally to him). I never took what belonged to others

and never wronged any man.…These things I

did, being mindful of coming into ( or

arriving in) the presence of God after death.

For I knew the day of the Lords of Truth,

when they make division in the judgment. A

prayer for him who loves God ( or whom

God loveth), that he may reach his spirit

home without misfortune.” 72 Both in his civil and priestly functions, Petosiris was

openhanded in time of need, a pillar of

strength in times of trouble (the stormy

transition from Persian to Greek occupation

of Egypt), “toiling for his god, seeking the

welfare of his fellow citizens,…protector of

all in his city,…support of the fatherless,”

etc. 73 His confidence waxes strong before

the divine judge because, according to his claim, “I have committed no sin, I have done

injury to none, I was upright in heart and

practiced justice, remaining faithful to thee

while on earth; I have committed no crime.”

By his own accounting, no charge can be

brought against him before the judges. 74

But it is as a series of obstacles and trials

that the Way both teaches and tests the

initiate. As in the Book of Breathings, one

must here face Him of the Warlike

Countenance and try one’s strength in combat

against the opposing denizens of darkness on

the way. 75 Only by divine guidance and protection does he narrowly escape the

sacrificial block and fire; saved by an

arrested sacrifice, 76 he is rescued because those who would put him to death have

themselves become the sacrificial victims

(sheep and goats) and thus provided a

substitute and an atonement (see pp. 84–85,

fig. 19). 77

It is as a “follower” in the company of the

god that he enjoys the salvation of a guiding

light amid the encircling gloom. 78 Among other things, he must stand trial for his life in

the Great Hall of Judgment. 79 In the Petosiris story, the hero must face nine juries, each

made up of a trio of gods (in the Book of

Breathings it is seven gates, each with three

guardians, that he must pass). The juries sit

at Busiris, Letopolis, Pe, and Dep, the

archaic centers of human sacrifice,

reminding us that the seven gates of the Book

of Breathings represent seven deadly sins

and can only be passed after a close

examination of the candidate, who must

demonstrate both his knowledge and his

innocence.80 Petosiris, having passed his tests, demands admission to heaven: “Hail,

ye Lords of Justice.…Let me enter, … for I

am shining in your forms and am in

possession of your powers ( ḥkȝw).…For I

know your names, … I know the name of this

god.…I am everything that he is, and vice

versa.…I have joined hands in the innermost

temple which my father has given me,

[calling me] ‘My son of my body.’”81

Figure 20. At the center of the south wall (fig. 18), the most important panel in the temple, the winged goddesses Edjo and Mut gently fan the kheper

beetle, symbolizing the sun-god’s transformations.

The scarab rests on what Joseph Smith described as the “pillars of heaven” (Fac. 1, fig. 11). On the far left, the headdress of the goddess of the north wind is a billowing sail.

Below in the crypt, the imported blackened pine

sarcophagus was inlaid with hundreds of delicate

glass hieroglyphs (the text of BD 42). Courtesy of Cairo Museum.

The final ordinance, that just referred to,

takes place in the crypt—it is the end of the

road, the dead end of the underworld. But as

in the tomb of King Unas and the Book of

Breathings, it is not the end after all. The

subject not only reverses his steps and takes

his way to heaven—following the example

of the sun-god who reverses his course as

soon as he has reached the lowest depths

(fig. 20)—but promises to take others with

him, delivering “those who sit in darkness”

in the manner of pharaoh, who visits the

underworld in the Amduat texts from the

royal tombs of the Eighteenth Dynasty. The final Petosiris text (on the sarcophagus)

reads: “Petosiris,…with thee are the

inhabitants of the duat; their faces turn to thee, the Living One, in thy capacity as god

forever.” 82 But the culminating scene, with its triumph and coronation motifs, takes

place in the “chapel,” which corresponds to

the “celestial room” in the tomb of Unas. As

the candidate is promised three degrees of

glory in the opening lines of the Joseph

Smith Book of Breathings, so at the gate of

the chapel he finally achieves them: “Glory

in heaven in the presence of Re, power on

earth in the presence of Geb, and victory in

the telestial worlds ( ẖr.t-nṯr).” 83 Here he is

“exalted to the height of heaven” and

“descends to the depths of the duat.” He is free to visit the necropolis, but he is also

free to leave it, for, being divine, he may go

wherever he pleases. 84

Figure 21A–B (top), 21C (bottom). P. Herweben,

Twenty-first Dynasty. Courtesy of Cairo Museum.

The Herweben Papyri

Going back a full thousand years before

the Joseph Smith Papyri Book of Breathings,

we meet with the so-called mythological

Papyrus of Herweben, in two parts (fig.

21).85 Herweben was the daughter of a king and high priest of the Twenty-first Dynasty

(ca. 1054–795 B.C.). Her story is told in

pictures, with only a few brief but helpful

notes in hieroglyphic.

A. The lady, bringing a lavish gift of

sacrificial meat, bread, and fruit of the vine

salutes the Horus-headed figure designated

in the text as Ptah-Sokar-Osiris, Lord of the

Temple (mystic shrine), “who rises hale and

hearty.” The emphasis is all on the rites of

the New Year (Sokar-Osiris) and the

creation (Ptah). Before the figure on the

throne is the skin garment of regeneration,

and behind him stands the universal mother,

Hathor.

B. Herweben is washed by Thoth, the

master of ordinances, and Horus; the water

flowing from the vases is designated by

streams of tiny signs of life and power .

On her head is a very large cone of scented

oil, which does not appear in any of the

subsequent portraits of the lady (in one case

[F], it has been erased).

Figure 21D–E (top), 21F (bottom). P. Herweben.

Courtesy of Cairo Museum.

C. Herweben venerates the symbols of

creation, rebirth, and resurrection, with

emphasis on the passing of time. A brief

inscription says that this is happening at the

New Year, while the union of the child Re-

Horakhty, seated within the cycle of

generation upon a horizon-symbol with Re-

Sokar-Osiris, denotes the winter solstice.

The child faces a cynocephalus ape, who

greets the sun at its rising, and a huge

wedjat- eye symbolizing the complete resurrection. Creation is the theme.

D. In this famous drawing, the lady,

beneath a wild fig tree, would drink the

water of life but is confronted by a

dangerous reptile beneath a willow

(poplar?) tree (the symbol of death).

E. Next she is seen sowing and reaping in

the fields, either dressing and tending the

garden or working by the sweat of her face.

F. Leaving the farm, the imagery is all that

of travel. The lady hails the solar bark of

Re-Horakhty, sailing over the heavens; the

god’s attendants are again Horus and Thoth,

this time shown as mummies, but

immediately behind them is a large wedjat-

eye promising resurrection. At the prow,

Seth drives off the great serpent, Apophis,

who tries to arrest the progress of the ship,

which is drawn by four jackals, “openers of

the way,” and four apotropaic serpents.

G. The ship having safely passed, the lion,

symbol of bloody sacrifice, renders the great

serpent incapacitated by inflicting upon him

five wounds.

Figure 21G–I (top), 21J–K (bottom). P. Herweben.

Courtesy of Cairo Museum.

H. The deliverance is complete: the sun is

shown bursting from the confining mountains

of the underworld, and within the disk a

great scarab symbolizes the moment or act of

transition from one state or form of existence

to another—eternal progression. Herweben celebrates her delivery in a gesture of

ecstatic praise and thanksgiving as she

declares, in the inscription, that she is now

truly justified. She faces a surprising figure,

a ram enthroned behind two large ḥs-vases

(signifying praise or grace) and giant lotuses;

the combination and position of the ram and

the huge plants closely resemble objects

found in the royal cemetery of Ur, designated

by their discoverers as “the Ram in the

Thicket.” 86 Is Herweben here giving thanks and praise to the ram as a substitute

sacrifice?

I. A lion-headed figure, designated as

“Doorkeeper of the House of Truth” (lions

still guard the doors of our courthouses),

conducts Herweben to a door or screen that

is opened.

J. On the other side of the door, the four

familiar canopic figures (Book of Abraham,

Facsimile 1, figs. 5, 6, 7, 8), representing the vital organs, the four elements of which the

body is composed, and the four regions of

the earth from which they come, are shown

passing through the coils of the great serpent,

through which, according to the Egyptians,

all things must pass to be reborn.

K. The resurrection in progress: Osiris,

bursting from his mummy bands, is halfway

between the horizontal and vertical, and the

scarab and rising sun above him show which

way things are going. It is a new life; leaving

the embrace of the serpent, he is rising from

his bed of dust and ashes, interspersed with

glowing coals, while a bold inscription

declares that Osiris is risen hale and sound

in the holy ( ḏsrt) land, which is the place of the holy mountain or mound, Re-Khepri—in

effect, the primordial mound of the first

creation.

Notes

1. Philippe-Jacques de Horrack, “Le Livre des Respirations d’après les manuscrits du Musée du Louvre,” in

Oeuvres diverses, ed. Philippe Virey and Gaston Maspero, BE 17 (Paris: Leroux, 1907), 110–37, pls. vii–

xi.

2. Name meaning “Osiris, the Greatest and Oldest.”

3. Raymond O. Faulkner, A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1962), 87; Hermann Ranke, Die ägyptischen Personennamen (Glückstadt: Augustin, 1935), 1:176 no. 1, s.v. “archaizing.”

4. m sšrw mȝʿ “as a successful method”; Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 248.

5. [There is some question about how the verbs in this series, which are written as though they were older negative future forms, are to be understood at the time the papyrus was written. They can either be taken as negative future forms ( nn sḏm=f forms), or, taking nn as a miswriting for n, as is also common at this time period, as negative past forms ( n sḏm=f forms). Nibley has taken them as negative past forms—eds.]

6. [The scribe has written nw “of” for the expected m “in.”

As Demotic and Coptic transcriptions show, there often seems to be no distinction made in the pronunciation of these two terms—eds.]

7. [The scribe of the Joseph Smith Papyri has written m in place of =w, realized his mistake, tried to correct it, and

instead put a blob of ink on the papyrus, failing to make the correction properly. Nibley has translated the scribal error. For an explanation of the following three columns, see commentary, part 7—eds.]

8. De Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” 135–36.

9. Richard A. Parker, “The Joseph Smith Egyptian Papyri: Translations and Interpretations: The Book of Breathings (Fragment 1, The ‘Sensen’ Text, with Restorations from Louvre Papyrus 3284),” Dialogue 3/2 (1968): 98.

10. Klaus Baer, “The Breathing Permit of Hôr: A Translation of the Apparent Source of the Book of Abraham,”

Dialogue 3/3 (1968): 119–20.

11. Jean-Claude Goyon, Le Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279

(Cairo: IFAO, 1966), 28–62.

12. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 1–5, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 28.

13. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 5–14, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 31–32.

14. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 15–21, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 36–39.

15. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 21–29, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 39–40.

16. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 30–36, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 43–44.

17. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 37–44, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 46–47.

18. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 45–53, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 50–55.

19. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 53–58, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 56–59.

20. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 58–61, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 59.

21. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 2, 6–7. The vignettes are in the foldout at the back of the book.

22. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 6.

23. P. Louvre N. 3284 §13 (4/14–5/3) lines 79–89, in de Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” pls. 10–11.

24. [Given the early second century B.C. date currently favored for the Joseph Smith Papyri, the tomb of

Petosiris is a mere century earlier—eds.]

25. Gustave Lefebvre, Le tombeau de Petosiris (Cairo: IFAO, 1923–24), 1:1–2, 36.

26. Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 1:13.

27. Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 1:24.

28. Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 1:37.

29. Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 1:37–40, quotation on 39.

30. Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 1:40–41.

31. Adolf Erman, Eine ägyptische Quelle der “Sprüche Salomos” (Berlin: Preussischen Akademie, 1924), 92.

32. Henri Frankfort, The Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos (London: Egyptian Exploration Society, 1933), 1:29.

33. Tomb of Petosiris 5–8, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:3; the texts are translated in the first volume.

34. Tomb of Petosiris 59/8, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:32.

35. Tomb of Petosiris 57, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:28–29.

36. Tomb of Petosiris 82/78–79, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:62.

37. Tomb of Petosiris 102/4–6, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:75.

38. Tomb of Petosiris 12, 16, 19, 23–24, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:4, 6–8.

39. Tomb of Petosiris 82/1–79; 148/4–5, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:60–62; 101.

40. For a discussion of the Opening of the Mouth ordinance, see below, commentary to lines 36–37, pp. 164–82.

41. Tomb of Petosiris 82/69, 73, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:62.

42. Tomb of Petosiris 27–28, 30–31, 35–36, 39, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:9–14.

43. Tomb of Petosiris 82/70–71, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:62.

44. Tomb of Petosiris 82/93–97, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:65.

45. Tomb of Petosiris 62/4–5; 61/18; 81/47–68, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:55–57.

46. Tomb of Petosiris 81/61–68; 61/19–20; 62/4–5, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:56–57.

47. Tomb of Petosiris 37, 41–51, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:14–24.

48. Tomb of Petosiris 26, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:9.

49. Tomb of Petosiris 81/54–58; 61/22–25, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:55–56.

50. Tomb of Petosiris 58/8–11; 61/8–12, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:29, 35.

51. Tomb of Petosiris 56/8–9, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:28.

52. Tomb of Petosiris 69/3–6, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:44.

53. Tomb of Petosiris 58/14–15, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:30.

54. Tomb of Petosiris 58/16–17, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:30.

55. Tomb of Petosiris 58/15, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:30.

56. Tomb of Petosiris 58/16–17, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:30.

57. Tomb of Petosiris 59/1–2; 62/2, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:32, 38.

58. Tomb of Petosiris 59/5, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:32.

59. Tomb of Petosiris 62/2, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:38; cf. Psalm 1:1–6.

60. Tomb of Petosiris 58/22; cf. 58/31, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:30–31.

61. Tomb of Petosiris 61/28–30, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:36–37.

62. 1QS IV, 6–8; see appendix 1 for an alternate translation by Nibley.

63. Tomb of Petosiris 115/3, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:82.

64. Tomb of Petosiris 116/2–3, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:83.

65. Tomb of Petosiris 81/78, 81, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:62.

66. Tomb of Petosiris 125–26, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:89–90.

67. Tomb of Petosiris 116/2–4, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:83.

68. Tomb of Petosiris 61/1–4, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:35.

69. Tomb of Petosiris 59/5, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:32.

70. Tomb of Petosiris 55/3, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:27.

71. Tomb of Petosiris 81/17–22, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:54.

72. Tomb of Petosiris 116/4–6, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 1:159; 2:83. [Lefebvre cites the scripture as Psalm 44:8, which is correct for numbering systems based on the Septuagint, but we have changed the

reference to follow the numbering system more

commonly used—eds.]

73. Tomb of Petosiris 128/5–6; 138/4, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:91, 96.

74. Tomb of Petosiris 70/4–6, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:45.

75. Tomb of Petosiris 66/6–7, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:42.

76. Tomb of Petosiris 63/4–8, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:39–40.

77. Tomb of Petosiris 80/18–19, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:51; cf. Abraham and the priest of Pharaoh in Abraham 1:7–20.

78. Tomb of Petosiris 74, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:48.

79. Tomb of Petosiris 125/5–6; 65/12–13, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:89; 41.

80. Tomb of Petosiris 80/3–95, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:50–53.

81. Tomb of Petosiris 151/1–6, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:102.

82. Tomb of Petosiris 152/3; 66/8–9, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:103; 42.

83. Tomb of Petosiris 54/1–4; 102/1, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:26; 74–75.

84. Tomb of Petosiris 106/11, in Lefebvre, Tombeau de Petosiris, 2:77.

85. Alexandre Piankoff, “Les deux papyrus ‘mythologique’

de Her-Ouben au Musée du Caire,” ASAE 49 (1949): 145–68, pls. 1–12; also in Alexandre Piankoff,

Mythological Papyri (New York: Pantheon, 1957), 2: pls. 1–2.

86. Leonard Woolley, “Ur of the Chaldees”: The Final Account, Excavations at Ur, rev. and enl. ed. (London:

Herbert, 1982), 97, an allusion to Genesis 22:13.

Commentary, Part 1

The Nature and Purpose of the

Book of Breathings

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 1–7

1 (1/1). 1 Beginning of the Book of Breathings, which Isis made for her

brother Osiris, to make his ba live, to

2. make his body (corpse) live, to make

young all his members anew; that he might

enter ( lit. join) the horizon along with his father, Re, to make

3. his ba appear in glory in heaven in the disk of the moon, and that his body might shine

in ( or as) Orion in the womb of the lower

heaven ( nn.t) of Nut;

4. and to cause to happen the same things for the Osiris ( i.e., the candidate or

initiate), the God’s Father and Prophet of Amon-Re King of the Gods, Prophet of

Min-

5 (1/5). Amon-Re, Bull-of-His-Mother, upon

his great throne, Wsỉr-Wr,2 Justified [ JSP

has Hor, Justified], the son of one of like honors to these,

6. Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, 3 Justified. Hide it! Hide it! Do not let any man read it! It is

beneficial

7. to a man in the next world ( ẖr.t-nṯr) when he lives ( or that he may live) again, having been proven true (effective) countless (millions of) times.

Commentary: “Book” or “Letter”?

An Intimate Document

Line 1: “Book”

The word šʿy or šʿ.t designates any document or writing4 and is commonly

rendered “book” when found, as here, “in titles of later religious books. ”5 Bruno Stricker and Jean-Claude Goyon both

maintain, however, that “letter of breathing”

is a more appropriate rendering, 6 the latter seeing in it “a sort of ‘letter of

recommendation’” to be presented to the

rulers of the underworld (see p. 29, fig. 4). 7

Siegfried Schott favors “breathing document

( Schrift zum Atmen)” for šʿ.t. 8

Its form and content suggest that the Book

of Breathings is a sort of notebook, written

not for the general reader but only for the use

of one man, to whom it served as an aid to

memory. Étienne Drioton notes that even the

very ancient Papyrus Ramesseum B, far from

being an exposition of the long and important

rites it deals with, was only “the aide-

mémoire for a master of ceremonies.” 9

Philippe Derchain has shown that the well-

known Papyrus Salt 825 was also “a sort of

aide-mémoire for the master of ceremonies in charge of the rites,” who had jotted down

“a mass of hints” for his own use “in very

concise and sometimes obscure form.” 10 The Pyramid Texts themselves were placed on

the walls of tomb chambers and passages to

tell the priests what they should do and say

at each particular station in the long

ceremonies. 11 The dramatic text of the famous Shabako stone, perhaps even more

ancient than the Pyramid Texts, was,

according to Kurt Sethe, a directive for

people participating in a ritual play, whose

lines are much longer and whose actions are

much fuller than here indicated. The content

of the play is hinted at. The text gives us

little more than the actors’ cues; they are

prompter’s cards for the use of those who

know their parts already. Along with that,

they are sacred and secret—is there any

reason that they should not puzzle us? 12 The

Egyptians necessarily cultivated skill at summarizing and condensing, and it has been

noted that the first chapter of the Book of the

Dead is really an epitome of the entire

book.13 The Joseph Smith text, hastily dashed off without any concern for

appearances, retouched from time to time as

words faded or flaked off, showing as it

does the marks of wear and tear, was no

mere formal display piece like the rest of the

Joseph Smith Papyri, but bears the character

of a useful and very private and personal

notepad.

In the light of this technique and tradition,

Derchain was able to explain the peculiar

and baffling nature of Papyrus Salt 825:

“The scribe wanted to compose a sort of

manual for the ceremonies of the House of

Life, dealing with rites for the conservation

of life. ”14 Though the matter of the text can be found in many other documents, only one

sentence in this papyrus, according to Derchain, can be found verbatim in any other

writing, which indicates that the scribe was

jotting things down in his own words, simply

as an aid to himself. The text also reveals not

only that the writer knew the rites by heart,

but also that he had access to other books in

case he wanted to make sure of anything;

what he has given us is “a guideline through

an apparently abundant collection of

liturgical writings which were followed one

by one at the prescribed moments”15—a great help to the scribe but a miserable

teacher for us.16 He needed only the briefest mention to know what was going on;17 the briefest mention only confuses us. His

jottings, though in the contemporary idiom,

contain religious formulas in a language that

was no longer spoken, 18 and some of his comments are jotted down from much older

—in fact, very ancient—priestly

commentaries (he had been doing research in the library)19 to explain texts already obscure with age.20 To complete the confusion of the modern student, this text is

introduced by “an exercise in cryptography

… in vertical columns,” which does not

belong to the ideas in the main text. 21

This last is matched in the Joseph Smith

Book of Breathings by four vertical columns

of hieroglyphs that flank Facsimile 1 and

were originally on the same papyrus strip.

There are other indications that the Joseph

Smith text is just such an abbreviated jotting

of notes as Papyrus Salt 825. For one thing,

it is much shorter even than the latter, though

it is very apparent that the ordinances with

which it deals were of supreme importance

and also very long and involved; this cannot

be an account of them, but only a series of

reminders, fortunately and necessarily in the

proper order, of little use to anyone else, but

prized above all other things by the owner. If

“the Book of Breathings is without doubt the

most important exponent of the funerary

literature” of its time22 and was esteemed so highly by its owners that they were buried

with it clutched to their bosoms or placed

under the head or at the feet as the final act

of the funeral just as the coffin lid was shut

down,23 why is it of such a contemptibly small size (a roll “about the size of a Tuscan

cigar,” as Giuseppe Botti puts it)24 and so badly written, as our Joseph Smith version

is, with careless and irregular spacing of

lines and characters? Everything indicates a

very personal and limited use of the

document.

Significance of “Breathings”

Line 1: “Breathings ( or Respirations)”

The word snsn has the plural strokes

throughout the text except at line 63 (3/20).

Snsn has many meanings, but all fall under the three general categories of (l) breathe,

breath, breath of life, odor; (2) joining or

uniting with an individual (king or god), or a

company, entering a bond of brotherhood;

and (3) suffusing or fusing with, as incense

or raiment with the body; fragrance, light,

air, or spirit investing an image or mingling

with the stars. 25 These meanings are all related, as can be seen in a passage from the

Book of Wandering through Eternity: “Thy

nose breathes ( snsn) the north wind. … thou kissest ( snsn) Osiris in the great Golden

House … and unitest thyself to ( snsn m) the company of the saved.” 26 Hence it would be foolish to dogmatically confine the meaning

in the present text to a single context. Since

all the rites and ordinances, both for the

living and for the dead, have as their express

purpose the achieving of eternal life, for

which the Egyptians considered the breathing

of air to be a prime prerequisite, 27 and though a great variety of rites and spells is

presented under the title of snsn, “the goal pursued is the same for all of them” 28—

namely, the “total security” of eternal life

and exaltation. 29

Breathing “Permit”? Passport,

Identification, Guidebook,

Certificate

Line 1: “( or Breathing Permit)”?

Professor Klaus Baer’s rendering of the

title šʿỉ.(t) n snsn as “Breathing Permit” both gives and takes away, pointing up an

important function of the document but

limiting it unduly. It is indeed, like chapter

182 of the Book of the Dead, “a sort of right

of passage to the next world ( eine Art

Wegerecht zum Jenseits) , ” as Schott puts it; 30 but in the same sentence Schott notes

that it is also a kind of identification ( Ausweis) and a guide through and to the

gates and wonders of the underworld. Thus

Stricker designates as Passeports d’Éternité

certain manuscripts of the Second Book of

Breathings, which, however, represent only

one of three classes of Breathings texts.31

True, our Breathings document is one of the

“passports to eternity,” 32 but it serves as such for a number of reasons, its function as

a permit being only one of them. Thus

Papyrus Leiden T 32 does double duty: “The

Book of Breathings of Thoth protects you; no

one denies you entrance to the Hall of

Osiris.” 33 It serves as a passport, Goyon points out, because it contains whatever is

necessary and sufficient to enable the holder

to reach his destination in spite of all

obstacles.34 This means that the Book of Breathings provides its bearer with

identification, being also (like the Coffin

Texts and Book of the Dead) a “sort of ‘letter of recommendation,’”35 a request to grant passage. 36 Hence it is a ticket or pass. 37

More than a request, it is a decree, signed by

high authority, commanding free passage for

the dead. 38 But since the traveler is on his own a good deal of the time, it also contains

information and instructions to help him on

his way: it warns him of obstacles and tells

him what to do to avoid or overcome them

and what to say when his passage is

challenged. 39 The instructional material in particular qualifies this most helpful

document as decidedly more than a mere

permit, though it does serve as such (cf. line

63). Like the Eighteenth-Dynasty Writings of

the Hidden Chambers, its particular value to

the dead and the living is as a textbook of vital instructions. 40 Preoccupation with sealing and documents of identification is

characteristic of the ancient mysteries

elsewhere, such as the well-known Orphic

“passes for the dead” on gold tablets41 and the seals— symbola or tesserae—admitting the living and the dead to ritual banquets and

other ceremonies. 42

The Book of Breathings has been

variously designated as a writing, letter,

record, road permit, meal ticket, pass,

directive or order, and handbook for local

authorities. 43 As a guidebook, it contained helpful hints to the traveler, including “road

maps complete with legends ( des cartes

géographiques munies de légendes).” 44

Above all, its purpose was to keep its owner

properly informed: “Who knows this picture will eat bread with the living in the temple

of Atum; … who knows it [this picture] is

one whose ways are correct, leading him on

the right road to Rostau.” 45 It is imperative that the dead know what certain stretches of road and country look like, for the way was

dangerous, and for that he should also know where to look for the appropriate pictures. 46

“It is made as shown in this book; whoever

knows it will share in the blessings of

heaven and earth.” 47 The ritual traveler is told just where to look for the proper maps

and illustrations in the ceremonial passages

and chambers: “This is how it looks … and

you will find it on the east side of the

chamber” (eleventh hour). 48 One is enabled to recognize the proper guide for a given

stretch of the journey by being shown the

pictures “of those who show the way to the

secret in this holy path.” 49 And when one comes to the water, “This is the manner of

the ship that one must board” (fig. 22). 50

Figure 22. Starting from the right, the initiate is washed and clothed (the symbols on the tray signify clothing) before he arrives in the fields of bliss. From a sense of modesty, the Egyptians rarely depicted

completely unclothed humans. On the left, the next world is shown as a map: the dead sails, feasts, labors in the field, and meets with exalted beings. P. Nebseni (BD 110), ca. 1440 B.C. BM 9900 © Copyright The

British Museum.

“The validity of every formula depends

entirely on a knowledge of the formula.” 51 A ticket or pass is not enough: “To attain this

goal, the deceased must know the names of

the demons … and must know how to

recognize them” ;52 “if the deceased knows the names, he can easily pass … and reach

his goal.” 53

The document called ʿft.t may open the

way for its holder by providing him with

food and drink, 54 the saving document serving as both a pass and a meal ticket.

Schott notes the association when he points

out that a certain “writing of Thoth ( mḏȝ.t n.t Ḏḥwty)” which the lady Hathor carries with her on a journey to Heliopolis seems to

serve to supply her with either food or

passage ( etwa zur Versorgung mit

Gottesopfern oder als Pass)55 and could well supply both, as did the ancient feasting-tesserae of the Greeks and Romans. 56 Schott also suggests that this is an early form of the

Book of Breathings. 57 The usual declaration is that these certificates are “beneficial ( ȝḫ)”

to the holder. 58 It is “beneficial on earth,” as

well as in the hereafter, provided the initiate knows what is in each book and picture. 59

He who knows “passes by all obstacles and

cannot fail” ;60 offering cakes are assured him,61 along with Re. Armed with knowledge, he walks in confidence.62 As early as the Pyramid Texts, the person who

“do[es] not know the Thicket of Reeds” must

yield his seat in the heavenly ship to one

who does. 63 In the Book of the Dead, he gets the seat in the boat only if certain words are

spoken over certain texts and sketches. 64 The funerary literature, as Schott points out, was

a didactic structure ( Lehrgebäude) built up of a series of interviews ( Wechselreden) in which questions were asked, mostly about

objects in the other world, and answers were

expected, the name of each object being a

token or password, “the key word or

solution ( Kennwort, die Lösung), which

permitted the dead to pass on.” To pass such

a series of questionings required a substantial Erfahrungsschatz or body of

knowledge, and it was this “beneficial”

knowledge that was contained in the funerary

texts. 65

The Importance of Knowing

This emphasis on (1) knowing,

implemented by (2) pictures and diagrams

with (3) instructions regarding where to look

for them, finds striking expression in the

Book of Abraham: “And that you may have

[1] a knowledge of this altar, I will refer you to [2] the representation [3] at the

commencement of this record” (Abraham

1:12); “That you may have [1] an

understanding of these gods, I have given you [2] the fashion of them [3] in the figures at the beginning” (Abraham 1:14). That is

definitely the Egyptian way and in the

Egyptian spirit—another bull’s-eye for the

Book of Abraham.

Let us sum up the functions of this writing.

It has been designated as a vade mecum, or guidebook to the hereafter; 66 or as a

“passport to eternity,” 67 comparable to the golden Totenpässe (passports for the dead) of the Orphic mysteries.68 It has been called a “letter,” 69 specifically a “letter of recommendation.” 70 Its purpose is not to establish the owner in his eternal home,

whether infernal or celestial, but merely to

assist him in getting there. The idea of

“tickets” could go back to those prehistoric

mummy tags which aided in the disposal of

the dead; 71 as such, a Breathings text would be a mere tessera or symbolon, like the admission tokens used in the Greek and

Roman feasts and mysteries. 72 In the end, Goyon decides that it is really “more of a

sort of amulet or talisman” than a serious

redaction of funerary rites—a shipping tag, so to speak. 73 The Breathings text Papyrus Leiden T 32 points out the great importance

of having one’s papers in order, 74 and the owner of that document, setting the supreme

example, had no less than four Books of

Breathings buried with him! 75 Finally, since one prepares for one’s heavenly home while

still in this life, the writing was as beneficial

to the living as to the dead.76

Who Is the Real Author? Isis,

Thoth, the Scribe

Line 1: “which Isis made for her brother Osiris”

“The Book of Respirations Written by Isis

for Her Brother Osiris” is properly the title

of the second of the three types of Breathings

books, according to Stricker. 77 Indeed,

“Book of Breathings” is not a real title at all

but simply designates a class of literature, Stricker avers, noting that the title of Papyrus

Leiden T 32, which belongs to the first of the

three types, is really “The Book of Living in

Eternity.” 78 Who is the true author of our text? After the mention of Isis, we read (lines

30–31) that it was Thoth who wrote this

book “with his own fingers.” 79 What is more, some Books of Breathings bear the

signature of their scribes, such as a Turin

Demotic text which has written on the back

of it, “The Book of Breathing made by the

scribe Pakhyntawy.” 80 Who, then, gets credit for the book? The stock argument against

associating the Joseph Smith Papyri with

Abraham is that they come much too late to

be from his hand. But we have shown that an

Egyptian book was “made” every time it was

“renewed” in fresh copies from time to time,

each new scribe taking credit for its

production. 81 Thanks to the Egyptian genius

for identification and the freest use of proxies in all ritual situations, there is no

need for rivalry here. Isis and Thoth are

often found together performing identical

functions, in which association Isis often

appears as Seshat, the lady of writing, 82

bearing the epithet “she who was in the

beginning,” while she and Thoth are both

called, without visible rivalry, the inventors

of writing. 83 The “aretalogy” of Isis begins,

“I am Isis, the ruler of all lands; I have been

taught by Hermes, and with Hermes I

invented letters.” It is her “assimilation to

Seshat,” the goddess of writing, that makes

this teamwork possible, though Dieter

Müller finds it rather strange.84 Thus Isis, Thoth, Seshat, and an Egyptian scribe each

claim to have “made” the same book or

writing, without any conflict or

contradiction. But “made ( ỉrỉ)” can in this context also mean “recite” rather than

compose, and this can apply to Thoth as well as to Isis. 85 For even Thoth cannot take credit for the book if, as Georges Posener

points out, “he has neither initiative … nor

authority to write official documents in his

own name,” but merely sets down what Re

orders him to. 86 Though Thoth is already copying down Breathings texts in early

times, 87 it is only in the Greco-Roman period, and specifically in the Book of

Breathings itself, according to Schott, that

Thoth actually composes sacred writings on

his own. 88 At first, to “make ( ỉrỉ)” a book meant to recite it; then, in the Middle

Kingdom, it could mean either to recite it or

to write it down,89 this being done by Thoth

“with his own fingers” as a secretary for the

“Lord of All Things,” or by Atum or Re. 90

According to Schott, it is Thoth in the library

who is the ultimate inspiration for the Books

of Breathings: first, the sacred formulas

were read at the funeral; next, a written copy was buried with the dead; and this was

“finally designated as a letter of Thoth to

provide breathing.” 91 But the material was at all times taken from the library of Thoth, of

great antiquity. The expression used in

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284, “written with his

own fingers,” goes back to the earlier

literature also, 92 thereby providing a useful tracer.

The rediscovery and exploitation of very

ancient and holy documents is a standard

occurrence on the Egyptian scene, from the

Shabako stone93 to the Setna-Khamuas cycle. 94 Chapter 137A of the Book of the Dead reports: “This text has been

transcribed in conformity to what was found

written (by) Prince Djedefhor, who

discovered it in a secret chest, in a writing

of the god himself, in the temple of Wnw.t [at Hermopolis] … as he was on a tour of

inspection of the temples, towns, etc. What is to be recited from it is secret. ”95

Osiris, the First Initiate

Line 1: “for her brother Osiris”

Isis was known as the discoverer of “the

medicine of immortality, ”96 by which she raised her brother Osiris from the dead, he

being the first person ever resurrected.

Earlier it was Thoth who wrote the divine

words for Osiris, 97 he being the author of all the sacred writing and sole patron of the

priests. 98 All the holy books are hermetic books, coming from Thoth (Hermes) in the

library of the House of Books and the House

of Life. So in the long Breathings text:

“Effective are thy ministrations ( ḥȝ.w=k) in the vicinity ( hȝwy) of the book house, thy confidence ( kfȝ.w=k) waxeth strong within

the House of Life.” 99 The basic Egyptian

ordinances, Moret observed, were “only an imitation of the rites of the ‘first time’” as

they were performed for Osiris. 100 It is interesting that in the Book of Abraham,

pharaoh was ever “seeking earnestly to

imitate that order established by the fathers

in the first generations, in the days of the first patriarchal reign, even in the reign of Adam”

(Abraham 1:26).

For the Egyptians, “the legend of Osiris …

provides the rationale of a ritual drama

designed to initiate the dead into a new and

eternal life.” 101 Though the earliest performances of the drama come from the

Eleventh Dynasty102 and the classic stories of Isis and Osiris flourish in the later period,

the basic plot and ideas behind the story go

back to the very beginnings; 103 the names of Isis and Osiris designate two of the five

epigomenal days of the oldest Egyptian

calendar.104 The rites were supposed to have

been revealed to men by Osiris, the first mortal to be resurrected: “death made of him

a being who knew the great secret” of how

mortals may become immortal. 105 In every list of Egyptian cults, Osiris and Isis appear

at the earliest level. 106 The baptismal rites of the Pyramid Texts are already an Osiris

ritual, according to Adolf Rusch,107 though in those days Osiris was still a grim rather than

an appealing figure. 108

In the Middle Kingdom the whole

religious life of Egypt centered around the

Osiris mysteries of Abydos, 109 where, according to Wolfgang Helck, they went back

to coronation ceremonies as old as the days

of prehistoric nomadism, 110 with the relationship of the king to Osiris altering

from time to time. Jaroslav Černý suggests

that Osiris was perhaps “originally a human

king who became deified after his death” but

adds that “no systematic exposition of this

myth is known from Egyptian sources.” 111

Important rites became “Osirianized” from

time to time down through the centuries, 112

until by the late period Osiris was all-in-all,

ending up as the Serapis of classic times. 113

Yet the nature and origin of Osiris remain a

complete mystery, widely conflicting

interpretations of his name being still put

forth by the best Egyptologists. 114 Indeed, in spite of Osiris’s immense prestige and

antiquity, J. Gwyn Griffiths finds the sudden

appearance of Osiris in the Old Kingdom to

be completely baffling.115 There were early funeral rites without any mention of

Osiris,116 and there is even evidence that the Osiris doctrine met with stiff opposition in

Egypt in early times.117

Purpose of the Book: A Rebirth

and a Renewing

Lines 1–2: “to make his ba live ( or revive), to make his corpse live, to make young all

his members anew”

The idea is definitely that of the

resurrection of the flesh, which held a

central position in the rites of Egypt. 118 The whole significance of Osiris—as of the

mysteries in general, in which the initiate

follows his example—is, according to

Gertrud Thausing, Stirb und Werde, or dying in order to rise again. 119 Osiris, prostrate but stirring on the lion couch (cf. Facsimile l),

depicts the moment of passage. 120 Long ago, Eugène Revillout noted that the purpose of

the prayers in the Book of Breathings is to

bring about the resurrection of the dead by

giving him breath.121 The nature of the ba is treated below (line 3).

Line 2: “to make young all his members anew”

The literal and physical nature of the Egyptian resurrection is attested by the

constant accompaniment of the word s·ʿnḫ,

“to make alive,” and by the related

expressions s·rnp, “to make young,” and

rwd, “to flourish, prosper, be firm and

enduring,” which necessarily apply to both

living and tangible things. By being reborn,

“the dead has won a new life of eternal youth

in the Lady of Heaven,” his permanent

childhood being attested by his never being

weaned again from his lady mother. 122

“Horus … found in the teachings of Osiris

himself, the secret which would recall him to

a new life and a better one—that would

make him invulnerable to a second death.” 123

By the rites the dead “removes” his former

nature and “puts on” a new one, even as a

snake changes its skin, the whole process

being one of rejuvenation. 124 It is nothing less than a reversal of the direction of time,

requiring that the candidate momentarily step into a timeless state, followed by a morning

of rebirth which, in a way, repeats the

creation itself, the “first time” (fig. 23).125

The idea is clearly expressed in the Jewish-

Christian Epistle of Barnabas 6.11: “Since he made us new by the remission of sins, he

made us another type, that we should have

the soul of children, as though he were

creating us afresh.” For the Egyptians,

“resurrection is a rebirth, … and so the dead

is treated as a newborn babe.” 126 An important part of the mysteries was the

imitation of a delivery, the squeezing of the

candidate through a narrow passage (as in

the pyramid of Unas; see p. 119, fig. 30) or

through the msḫn.t-skin of rebirth, by which he received new life regarded as his “new

birth.” 127 The assistant in the ceremony was a priest in the guise of Anubis in his official

capacity of “Rejuvenator ( rnpy).” 128 By

resurrection ( sʿnḫ, srnp, etc.), the Egyptian, like the Christian, meant the revival of the

body since that is “an indispensable part of

the person,” and a reuniting of body ( ẖȝ.t) and spirit ( bȝ) was essential to salvation; even when the ba and sḫm (power) left the body temporarily to sojourn in heaven, 129 the body was not entirely inert in the underworld

but had definite ties with the upper realm as

well130—an idea implemented dramatically by the hypocephalus.

Figure 23. As the solar-bark passes through the

waters symbolizing rebirth and rejuvenation, the child Harpocrates sits on the prow on the right as well as in a circle, which is both the new sun on the horizon and the embryo. Horus spears the serpent Apophis, while the Two Ladies, Isis and Nephthys, hail him.

Ptolemaic temple of Horus at Edfu, interior of

foretemple, ca. 100 B.C. Redrawn from Champollion, Monuments d’Égypte, 2: pl. 123.

The Sun on the Horizon as the Soul

in Transition

Line 2: “that he might enter the horizon along with his father, Re”

If the essence of cult and festival is

“transition, rite de passage, succession of lives,” 131 the great exponent of such meaningful motion is Re the Sun. 132 The disk is directly observable under normal

conditions only on the horizon: as “thou

passest over the sky, … every face …

watcheth thee and thy course, for thou thyself

art hidden from their gaze,” except when

“thou dost show thyself (to them) at dawn

and at eventide each day”—i.e., on the

horizon.133 It is when the sun is on the horizon that men can get a good look at it and

actually watch its motion even at the

portentous moment of transition between day and night, of passage from the lower world

to the upper heavens, or the reverse. “The

Gate of Heaven or Underworld, between the

earthly and the otherworldly spheres … was

from the earliest times localized in the ȝḫ.t, that is, the seam or juncture ( Nahtstelle) in the east and west where heaven, earth, and

underworld came into contact with each

other and where intercourse between the

spheres is possible.” 134 In passing the horizon, the sun-god and his ship both

change their natures as a prelude to other changes in appearance to follow.135 Actually, the sun does change its apparent shape,

color, and size on the horizon (see p. 256,

fig. 81). A variety of gates, pylons, false

doors, and passageways in Egyptian tombs

and temples are designated as horizons, such

being the symbol of the boundary between

this world and the other world. 136 Thus one

begins his journey through the hours of the Stundenwache by “standing on the threshold ( ỉdb) of the horizon,” which is the door of his “house.” 137 In the rites of the Unas pyramid, the middle chamber of the three

main rooms is called the “horizon” since it is

there that the dead takes his leave of the

underworld and enters the upper world, that

being where the ba emerges from the

coffin, 138 at which moment the dead is told,

“You purify yourself on the horizon” (fig.

24).139 When the time comes for the dead to leave the tomb, “a messenger comes to thee

from the great god: Come to heaven! Come

forth from Rw.ty, the Gates of the

Horizon.” 140

Figure 24. Photograph of Nibley reading the Pyramid Texts in the middle chamber of the pyramid of Unas, 1984. Nibley Archives.

The word ȝḫ.t, “horizon” (fig. 25), can

designate that particular spot on the skyline

at which either the first or last brilliant point

of the sun’s surface is visible at sunrise or

sunset, 141 these being movable points, represented by the ancients as a series of

gates or windows; or else the region just

below the horizon whose effulgent glory can

be seen reflected on our own upper sky at

dawn and twilight. Alexandre Piankoff

designates ȝḫ.t as a land of lakes through

which the sun had to pass just before it appeared on the visible horizon. 142

According to Schott, in the Pyramid Texts the

inhabitants of the ȝḫ.t live beyond the

mountains of the eastern and western

horizons, but on this side of the underworld

itself, belonging to the place of transition;143

while in the Amduat the entire underworld is

designated as “the western ȝḫ.t.” 144 Charles Kuentz maintains that the ȝḫ.t is not the

horizon line, “but an extended inhabited

region,” the eastern desert, being in this

world and designated as the tȝ nṯr, or land of the god, the god in this case being ȝḫ.t or Ḥr-ȝḫ.ty, the Lord of the Horizon. 145

For those who travel, especially in the

desert, the horizon is a constant and visible

proof of realities that may escape the city

dweller and the farmer. The horizon at dawn

and dusk is a sharp, hard, black line, as real

and intensely visible as anything can be. But

when you pick a mark on the horizon and walk up to it, lo, there is more beyond—

another horizon! We discover that the

horizon, the absolute limit of our vision, beyond which for us nothing exists, is only a

relative thing after all; the absolute limit of

our present visible world turns out to be

only the threshold to another world beyond.

Farmers and city dwellers, unaware and

suspicious of what lies beyond the safe oasis

or city walls, 146 are prone to an existentialist philosophy and take a skeptical and gloomy

view of what lies beyond the present life; but

the nomad of the desert can always believe

that there is something beyond because, for

him, there always is something beyond. One of the peculiar traits of Egyptian culture and

belief is, surprisingly enough, an obsession

with the idea of eternal progression, 147

another nomad heritage. The saints, das

wandernde Gottesvolk, have always been

drawn to distant horizons and spurned “this

present world” as altogether too

confining. 148 The passage from world to world and from horizon to horizon was

dramatized in the ordinances of the temple,

which itself represented a horizon. 149

Figure 25. Horus fuses with his father Re on the

horizon ( ȝḫ.t) to become Re-Horakhty. P. Nebseni (BD 149), ca. 1440 B.C. BM 9900 © Copyright The

British Museum.

Joining the Father Re—Union with

the Solar Disk

Line 2: “along with his father, Re”

There has been endless speculation as to

the real relationship of Re and Osiris.

Though the association of the sun-god with the ruler of the dead and the underworld

suggests a pact between two originally

separate and even hostile cults, yet the two

are found joined together from the earliest

times. And why not? Does not the sun visibly

spend half his time in the underworld? But

how does Osiris of the underworld get up

into the sky? That is not so obvious. But the

Shabako text tells how Osiris “passes

through the secret gates of the glory of the

Lords of eternity, following in the footsteps

of him who shines on the horizon, upon the

ways of Re.” 150 Re leads the way and Osiris follows, joining him at exactly the place and

the time at which the two worlds meet—on

the horizon, when “the secret gates of glory”

are opened. Bearing in mind that, from the

Middle Kingdom on, every deceased

Egyptian as a candidate for glory was an

“Osiris, ”151 we can understand why, in the

Kerasher text of the Book of Breathings,

Maat urges the dead to take advantage of his

father’s company to get him through: “Come,

pass thou on [ bs=k, a term referring to a step in initiation] to the place where thy father

is[,] that he may place thee among the divine

favoured ones!” 152

Figure 26. A mysterious representation of Osiris is surrounded by a ram skin of Re, the head of which

has the sacred beard. P. Salt 825, ca. 330–250 B.C., EA 10051/9 © Copyright The British Museum. The

Two Ladies, Isis and Nephthys, support a unique

image of Re, combining the ram-headed Amon-Re

with the body of Osiris in his distinctive white

garment. The inscription confirms the composite

image: “Osiris is at rest ( ḥtp) in Re; it is Re who is at rest in Osiris.” Reconstructed drawing from the tomb of Nefertari, ca. 1270 B.C.

“Re and Osiris, … far from opposing each

other,” appear in the Book of the Dead “to be

the one but a reflection … of the other. ”153

But this is no late reconciliation; for the

culmination of the archaic rite depicted in

Papyrus Salt 825, which is nothing less than

“the great secret of the ritual,” is “the

confusion in a single being of Osiris and Re

in the appearing of a mummy wrapped in ram

skin” (fig. 26). The association of Osiris and

Re is “the symbol of the moment of

resurrection. ”154 The wrapping, as we show below, is a ritual embrace, establishing a

relationship of father to son in a succession to kingship; in the sixth hour of the Amduat

“the king as sun-god confronts his own

corpse, with which he unites. He ministers to

those of the underworld, including the great

kings of old,” and then passes on to the next

hour, “that of Osiris.” 155 It was “in the throne room [that] Osiris was completely identified

with Re.” 156 In later times, priests speculated on the subject: “Who is this?

Yesterday is Osiris and To-day is Rā. …

Others, however, say that To-day is Rā, on

the day when we commemorate the festival

of the meeting of the dead Osiris with his

father Rā.” 157 Jan Zandee has observed that

“it is not only in Christian dogma but also in

the Egyptian theology that father and son are

of identical nature ( wesensgleich) , ” so that

“what applies to the one applies also to the

other.” 158

In our text, the word for “enter” the

horizon is ẖnm, meaning properly to join or fuse with. Since light is the universal

attribute of divinity, it is not surprising that

the sun is the Urbild des Gottes, which goes back to prehistoric beginnings at Heliopolis,

the sun-city,159 and that, though divinity appears in a plurality of forms, “the god of

the Sboyets [doctrinal teachings] never loses

his archaic characteristics, ever remaining

Re or another creator sun-god. ”160 The whole business of the Egyptian temple

centers around “the mighty drama of the sun

in his course ( das gewaltige Schauspiel des

Sonnenlaufes) , ”161 not only because the sun is the most obvious symbol of divinity, but

because the temple was, from megalithic

times, designed to serve as an observatory of

heavenly bodies and their motions,

especially the sun. 162 François Daumas describes as the culmination of temple rites

at Denderah “the cortege of priests …

moving along up the stairs to the terrace, …

there to achieve ‘union with the Disk.’”163 In the temple rites, Re is the real “protagonist

of the drama,” and all centers around him, 164

with whom the dead becomes identified:

Tout se réduit, en somme, à une

solarisation du mort. 165 Hence the fusion of the candidate with his father, Re, on the

horizon. “The heavenly journey of the

individual is an analogy to the voyage of the

sun on the divine path.” 166 It was at the moment that the sun’s eye pierced or entered

the court of the House of Life “to unite itself

with Osiris” that the fusion with Re took

place. 167 Again, just as the sun strikes the top of a ritual stone in the New Year’s rites of

Sokar-Osiris at Thebes, Osiris makes “union

with the solar disc.” 168 When Re assumes the title of Osiris, “they have one body and

‘speak with one mouth.’” Re becomes the

night-sun. 169

The ba in Glory

Lines 2–3: “to make his ba appear in glory in heaven”

The rites of royal pyramid burial ended

exactly at sunrise, when the ba ( bȝ) of the dead king joined his father on the horizon. 170

Just so, the dead is told, “Thy Ba flies after

Re, thou shinest at dawn and settest at even

every day.” 171 At the beginning of the Sinuhe story, the king “flew to heaven and was

united with the sun’s disk,” who was his

heavenly father: “the flesh of the god was

fused with him who made him.” 172 Whether one is entering or leaving the world, it is

fusion with the disk that effects passage.

According to Louis Žabkar, one (originally

just the king, but later everybody) received a

ba only at the time of the funeral, when the

ba left the body to carry on, not as a mere surviving part of the defunct, but as a

projection of the entire being, 173 the ba being that daemon which joins the body at birth

and accompanies it forever after (fig. 27; see

color plate 7). 174

Figure 27. The ba, bearing the seal which insures its identity with the person on the couch, hovers over the body. JSP VI (BD 89). © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

As a result of having fused with Re, the

subject enters celestial glory as a ba. It is common today to leave the word ba

untranslated—an excellent illustration (since

there is no more common word in Egyptian

and since the layman has a right to a

translation) of the principle that familiarity with an expression is no guarantee of

understanding. Concerning the nature of the

ba, “a widespread lack of clarity still

prevails”; 175 Žabkar, in fact, in a book on the ba, refuses to define it! 176 “A serious difficulty arises when we are called upon to

translate such words as ba, ka, akh into

modern languages,” he writes. “Perhaps we

can describe these manifestations as

‘multiple personalities’ or even better,

‘multiple impersonations.’” 177

The independence of the ba from other

aspects of being is emphasized in the Coffin

Texts, in which the ba appears (1) as part of both human and divine entities; (2) as

separable from the body; (3) as having an

earthly life both within and without the tomb,

being able to come and go freely and to live

in heaven while the body remains in the tomb

or underworld;178 (4) as having existed

before earth life; (5) as able to influence things and “enter into” them. 179 The many aspects of the ba have recently been treated by Thausing, for whom it is the

“understanding, knowing, independent part

of an individual which can go ‘wherever it

will,’ being spirit and not dependent on the

body: … its manifestation is in the wind, …

the divine breath of Shu”; 180 it is the Intellekt, Wisser, Bewusstseinsprinzip, or Seele of the dead. 181 The root meaning of the word is “to open,” implying revelation,

divine spark, spirit. 182 In particular, the ba is the mobile element, unhampered by a body

and free to move about; it goes and comes,

sometimes fetching food and drink for the

otherwise helpless corpse. 183

For, at death, the ba and the body are

separated, even though both may go on

living, according to our Book of Breathings:

“Thy corpse (flesh) lives in Busiris … while

thy ba lives in heaven all the time (every day)” (lines 50–51). And in the related

Papyrus Louvre N. 3292 we read, “Grant

that heaven may be for my ba and the duat for my body, that my nose may breathe the

fresh winds.” 184 “His ba is in heaven and his body is in the west” ;185 and so back to the Pyramid Texts: “The spirit is for heaven, the

corpse for the earth.” 186 Another interpretation is given by the Herweben text:

“They cause her ba to rise up to heaven like the ba of Re, while her body is in the duat like the ba of one who is united with

Osiris.” 187 The ba could even leave a man’s body during his mortal lifetime and return, as

in the case of Sinuhe when he passed out. 188

But this separation of body and spirit is

not permanent. In fact, it is the ba’s ultimate dependence on the body that assures the

latter of a share in eternal salvation. 189 For

the dead needs both bȝ and ẖȝ.t. 190 Žabkar sees in the ba “the totality of physical and psychic capacities” of the individual, it

being the fullest realization of the king’s

powers and the alter ego of the ordinary man

that takes over his physical functions. 191

According to Hans Goedicke, in the Old

Kingdom the ba was considered “an

immaterial being and spiritual power,” the

image projected by a personality rather than

an actual part of a person; it is an image that

a man builds up during his lifetime on earth

—it is himself as manifested by his acts, but

persisting after death. 192

In the darkest moment of the royal funeral

in the deepest and darkest of chambers, the

restorative process begins to take place,

with the ba assuming the most tenuous of

visible forms, that of smoke provided by

scented candles.193 Endowed with this preliminary materialization, the ba is able to

preserve its recognizable shape and to break forth from the coffin by main force; 194 next, it

“receives complete form in a statue,” 195

which is then crowned and anointed in the

“celestial room.” 196 The ba having asserted its independence at death, it is a matter of

great concern to bring the inert parts of the

person under its influence. 197 Hence, “this concept of the complete identity of the dead

with his ba is the core of the entire

resurrection ritual.” 198 Only when ba and body are permanently reunited can either

enjoy a fulness of glory. 199 In that state, however, the ba may unite with other ba s.

The plural form of ba ( bȝ.w) indicates

“divine entities in a general sense,” or

divinity “in its active and visible aspect, ”200

so that “to have a ba is to participate in the divine cosmic consciousness” 201—to share, as it were, in the councils on high.202

The idea that the ba of one exalted being may unite with that of another is the ultimate

expression of the mystery of identity, but it is

no more baffling than the total fusion of

persons and pronouns in the Gospel of John,

chapters 14 through 17, or in 3 Nephi 19.

Thus “the ba of Shu is Khnum. … The ba of Kek … is the night. The ba of Nun is Re. The ba of Osiris is the ram of Mendes. The ba of Sobek is the crocodile. The ba of all the

gods dwells in serpents. … The ba of Re is the whole land.” 203 In the Pyramid Texts, according to Sethe, “the dead himself is not

Osiris, but his soul, his ba, is Osiris, i.e., dwells in Osiris, even as the soul ( ba) of Osiris dwells in Orion or later in the

phoenix-bird.” 204 Thus the ba of Isis belongs to Sothis (Sirius) while the ba of Horus

belongs to Orion. 205 The ba of an exalted father may be with his son living on earth, 206

and it may even be possible to achieve an

earnest of the ba’s perfection while still in this life by virtue of the ordinances which

initiate one into a higher state of being.207

Thausing makes a distinction between the

“ba of life” (the “living ba”) and the “ba of the spirit,” 208 the former being the more perfect, with the capacity to procreate. 209

“The living ba,” according to Paul Barguet, refers to “the aspect of divinity par

excellence, the eternal,” being “the divine spark,” “the divine quality … which leaves

the individual at the moment of death and

which has its domain in heaven, as shown by

its bird form.” 210

In hieroglyphic script, the ba is designated by the figure of a bird and also by a pot with

fire in it (see p. 256, fig. 81a), showing,

according to Thausing, that the ba is both the divine phoenix-bird of the resurrection and

the divine fire. 211 Zandee sees the bird form as denoting primarily the office of the ba as

a messenger, in particular the messenger hawk between heaven and earth. 212 As Eberhard Otto explains it, from the beginning

man sought some form which would enable

him to get the best of the cold obstruction

and dark and terrifying confinement of the

grave; the most obvious form would be that

of a bird, freely and swiftly moving in any

direction and negotiating empty space in

defiance of gravity. It plainly offered the best

available solution to the problem of

mounting to heaven. 213 Though “nothing was ever farther from their mentality than ideas

of metempsychosis,” or transmigration of

souls, 214 though the Egyptians never did

“think of themselves as real birds after

death,” and though “the initiated knew it [the

ba] was a symbol,” 215 still there was always something special about bird symbols. The

first epistle of Clement, one of the most

respected of early Christian writings,

adduces the phoenix-bird of Egypt as unanswerable proof of the reality of a literal

resurrection. 216 Zandee thinks the Egyptians took the bird quite literally, stating that “the

bȝ is a power of the human soul, incarnated in a bird,” 217 and that “the ba-bird, bearing the head of a human person, instead of a

bird’s head, is supposed to be an incarnation

of a deceased” (see p. 435, fig 139). 218 But there is ample indication that disembodied

wings were, for the Egyptians, a compelling

symbol of speed, power, and freedom of

motion on the abstract level. 219 If the ba-bird is a phoenix or benu-bird “considered as the soul of Re,” 220 we must bear in mind that birds do communicate knowledge to men and

that the Egyptians were dedicated bird-

watchers. There is more to the Egyptian

symbolic birds than reaches the modern eye.

In chapters 82, 83, and 86 of the Book of the

Dead (JSP V and VI), the dead wants to

assume the form or function ( ḫpr) of a swallow. Theodor Hopfner recalls the

uncanny capacity of the swallow, noted by

ancient writers, to return to an exact spot at

an exact time as if by assignment, which was

anciently demonstrated at Koptos, the oldest

shrine of Egypt, even as it still is today at

Capistrano. 221 Such a display of inspired behavior certainly suggests the classical and

Christian story of the Egyptian phoenix, our

ba-bird, immortalized in English literature by an early Anglo-Saxon writer following

Lactantius, who tells how, exactly at the end

of five hundred years, the bird would return

from Arabia to Heliopolis to be sacrificed

on the flames and arise anew from its own

ashes as the type and earnest of the

resurrection.

Degrees of Glory

Line 3: “in the disk ( ỉtn) of the moon”

If Aton ( ỉtn) is “a development of the old sun-god of Heliopolis,” 222 it is strange to find his title applied to the moon. Indeed,

Raymond Faulkner’s dictionary renders ỉtn

simply as “sun; more specifically disk of the sun.” 223 Aton is the sun in its physical, visible aspect and has been compared with

“the window in heaven through which the

unknown god, ‘Lord of the Disk,’ shed a

portion of his radiance upon the world.” 224

In reliefs of the Amarna period, such as

appear on obelisks, the all-important Aton is

shown, not as a disk, but cut in very high

relief, strongly accenting its appearance as a

very palpable globe. 225 The expression ỉtn n ỉʿḥ inescapably associates the sun and moon as two physical globes. Since the word Aton

is used to designate the sun in contrast to the moon—“I give thee all that Aton sees and

what the moon sees”226—the unusual expression “Aton of the moon” evokes a

special situation. It has just been announced that Osiris is about to join with his father,

Re, to fuse with his disk on the horizon,227

and now we are told that at the same time his

ba is to enter the glory of the moon’s disk.

The two disks coincide, suggesting a solar or

even a lunar eclipse (fig. 28). “The meeting

of Re and Osiris in their astral aspects,”

writes Derchain of Papyrus Salt 825, “shows

that the throne chamber was consecrated to

rites related to the cycles of the moon and

sun.” 228 Battiscombe Gunn derives the imagery of the combined coronation and

resurrection rites of the Egyptians not from

the sun as such, but rather from the various

aspects of the visible disk, 229 and Elmer Suhr suggests that “from the suffering of the

sun [by eclipse] emerges the birth of the

ruler and the resurrected sun.” 230 The ideal time for the Isia festival was when the winter

solstice coincided with a moon at its

strongest and a lunar eclipse might occur. 231

Making union or meeting is all-important,

and here one wonders if the meeting or

fusing ( ẖnm) of the disks could be anything but an eclipse.

Line 3: “that his corpse might shine in ( or as) Orion”

Having fused with the disks of the sun and

the moon, the defunct now shines among the

stars of heaven. Here are the three steps in

sequence:

1. r ẖnm=f ȝḫ.t ḥnʿ ỉt=f Rʿ, “to join the horizon along with his Father, Re (the Sun)”

2. r sȝḫ bȝ=f m p.t m ỉtn n ỉʿḥ, “to make glorious his ba in heaven in the disk of the moon”

3. r psḏ ẖȝt=f m sʿḥ m ẖ.t Nw.t, “to shine (i.e.) his flesh in Orion, in the womb of Nut

(the starry heavens). ”232

Figure 28. Conjunction of the sun and moon over two-headed Horus, representing the moment of passage

from past to future, from one phase to another, here labeled “Khonsu the Great coming forth from Nw,”

the primordial heavenly waters. Greatly enhanced

from the lower back pillar inscription of a Late Period statue of a priest. Courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy. 1823 engraving in Champollion, Panthéon égyptien, [147].

The parallelism is obvious, the pattern a

conscious one; in each case a different word

for “glory”— Rʿ, sȝḫ, psḏ—is used: the first the glory of the sun, the second that of the

moon, and the third that of the stars,

suggesting the “three degrees of glory” in 1

Corinthians 15:41 and Doctrine and

Covenants 76:81, 86–98; 88:7–9; and

121:30. The “glory of the stars” is

specifically that of Orion; in contrast to the

constellation of the bear, low and dim on the

Egyptian horizon, Orion was the visible

symbol of the glory of the stars to the

Egyptians.233 More than that, “a sort of

‘theology’ of Orion and Sirius” prevailed in

ancient times all over the ancient Near East,

“having undeniable overall unity”; 234 an important center of this cult was Abydos,

center of the Osiris cult as well. 235 In this cult, Sothis (Sirius) and Osiris ( sȝḫ) are

“practically inseparable,” 236 and it is specifically Osiris as Orion who caused the Nile to rise. 237

Specific reference to Orion in our

Breathings text goes back to the earliest

times in Egypt, the word sȝḫ used here

designating both Osiris and Orion as the

place where departed spirits go. 238 The journey through the stars is a conspicuous

motif in the funerary literature. 239 “The stars Orion and Spd [Sirius] must carry the dead to heaven and save him from the state of the

dead” (fig. 29).240

Figure 29. Orion and Sirius in their boats, with the usual five-pointed stars above their heads, move on their eternal courses. In an unusual feature, Orion’s body is turned to his wife Sirius, while his head faces the opposite direction. The constellation of the bear is shown as an ox fastened to the north pole. Restored

drawing of the ceiling of the funerary temple of Ramses II, ca. 1230 B.C.

The idea of three degrees of glory can be

lavishly illustrated in Egyptian funerary art

(fig. 30). A fundamental example from the

pyramid age is the arrangement of the

chambers beneath the pyramids, which

follow the same general pattern as later

tombs and temples—that of three main

rooms: “The coffin chamber is the

underworld, the middle chamber is the upper

world, representing the world in which we

live,” 241 while the third room is called

“heaven ( qbḥw)” and is divided in turn into three equal recesses, alcoves, or

subchambers (the serdabs), in the center one

of which stands the invisible god Re-

Atum. 242 The crowning of the ba-image takes place in this central niche and is “the high

point of the mystery drama,” after which the

party leaves the pyramid to continue the rites

in the open air and on a higher level. This

“fusion of the king’s nature with the god of

heaven” is represented by the crowning of

the statue with the Moon-eye of Upper Egypt

and the Sun-eye of Lower Egypt. 243 The funeral party leaves the pyramid in three

stages, representing three degrees of

resurrection in which the coffin chamber is

the underworld, the middle chamber the

nocturnal upper world, and the serdab is

heaven, all “scenically depicted.” 244 A scene from Biban el-Mulūk, or Valley of the Kings,

depicting “the birth of the sun,” shows the

sun emerging in three stages from a pyramid

which has split in the middle to release him;

the pyramid is divided into three equal

horizontal sections, each of a different color

(see color plate 10). 245

Figure 30. The pyramid of Unas was the oldest

pyramid whose walls were covered with what

became known as the Pyramid Texts. The deceased

pharaoh was thought to move from the underworld

( dwȝ.t) through the horizon ( ȝḫ.t) to join the gods in the heavens ( qbḥw).

Certainly, the concept does not originate

with 1 Corinthians 15:40–42. Simeon ben

Jochai says that in the next world those who

come first “are like the sun; the next class like the moon; the third like the firmament; the fourth like the stars, ” etc.246

Rebirth by the Heavenly Mother

Line 3: “in the womb ( or body) … of Nut”

To be reborn in resurrection, the king must

enter again into his mother’s womb.247 The sarcophagus in which he lay was called

mw.t, which also means “mother,” 248 and was designed to represent the embracing

arms and wings of the starry sky-mother (fig.

31).249 “I no longer know my first mother whom I knew before,” says the resurrected

one. “Nut hath brought me forth, along with

Osiris.” Thus he “wins a new life of eternal

youth in the sky-goddess, and from her he

will never be weaned.” 250 Hence, also, after his underworld coronation, “the king leaves

off his aspect of Osiris to go to Nut, and

takes his place in heaven among the stars,

and he presents himself [for acceptance] at

the gates of the horizon.” 251 In Pyramid Text 606 §1688, the king is hailed as “Re, come

forth from Nut who bears Re every day. ”252

And when at his morning ablutions the king

is washed, anointed, and dressed in the

manner of a newborn babe, he “rejoices in

the picture of Nut that is in the chamber. ”253

He is the sun, who enters the womb of Nut

every evening to emerge reborn in the

morning.254

Figure 31. In this famous scene from the alabaster sarcophagus in the tomb of Seti I, birth and death are depicted as a passing through the waters. First, there is a mounting up from the arms of Nun (the primeval

waters), who supports a ship bearing five gods—Geb, Shu, Heka, Hu, and Sia, all patrons of knowledge and instruction—while at the prow stand three figures

representing doors (passages, degrees?). Isis and

Nephthys, the nursing mothers, receive into their arms and pass on the kheper beetle, symbolic of birth and transition, here pushing the rising sun before him; the sun is received into the arms of the sky-goddess Nut, who proceeds to give birth to him, who then becomes Osiris, his arched back and legs surrounding the duat.

Here the divine progress passes through a series of no less than five ritual embraces, from the large

image of Nut in her winged garment on the bottom of the sarcophagus through the transformations

engraved above her head. Book of Gates, twelfth

hour, ca. 1290 B.C. Courtesy of Soane Museum,

London.

Though there are many theories to explain

how the sky-goddess Nut became the womb

of the dead,255 there is no doubt that her first and oldest form was that of sky-goddess.

“The Two Lands were flooded with their

brightness, like the stars in the body of Nut,”

says an archaic inscription. 256 A very

“primitive” account depicts Nut as a sow who eats her children, the stars, 257

suggesting a return to the body of the

primordial mother by a cycle of nature; a

related concept is that of Nut swallowing the

sun in the west and bearing him again in the

east every day. 258 “The rejuvenating nocturnal journey of the sun can take place

within the body of the sky-goddess” and is

ritually repeated for all the dead, who by

entering Nun put off’ their former nature and

‘put on’ a new one, becoming renewed and

reborn.” 259 In the twelfth hour of the Amduat, the king or candidate emerges reborn: “He

comes forth from the duat; … he appears in glory between the thighs of Nut. The gate is

called Tnn (the first land of creation), and the place itself is called ‘When the darkness

comes the birth follows.’” 260 The low and narrow passages between the ceremonial

chambers of tomb and pyramid through

which coffin and mummy are dragged with much toil and labor, much pouring of water

to cool the friction-heated floors and

runners, and much reciting of spells and

incantations as the body is moved from one

degree of its progress to another, represent

the passages both of conception and of birth,

by which the dead is both begotten for his

rebirth and delivered into his new life, 261

emerging as “a singular star. ”262

A common image of apocryphal literature

compares persons who move between the

worlds to stars (see, for example, 1 Nephi

1:8–10). The whole idea of the dead

reentering the “Nut-cycle” goes back,

according to Wilhelm Czermak, “to the

primordial concept of the ‘dead as a

star.’”263 “Hail thee, Osiris, Orion in the sky, who … journeys with the stars of heaven, his

mother Nut having received him in her

time.” 264 “Glorious is Orion [Horus] in

heaven,” says the Lady, “… and I am Sothis

[Sirius] who protects him and is never far

from him.” 265 In the Pyramid Text, Isis comes to her brother “prepared ( spd) as Spd.t”

(Sirius—a play on words), the bridal star;

the child she bears as a result is Hor-Sopdet,

who comes forth as “Horus who is in

Sopdet. ”266

The Title “God’s Father”

Lines 4–6: “and to cause to happen the same things for the Osiris, the God’s Father and

Prophet of Amon-Re King of the Gods,

Prophet of Min-Amon-Re, Bull-of-His-

Mother, upon his great throne, Wsỉr-Wr ( or Osiris Greatest and Oldest), Justified, the

son of one of like honors to these, Ns-pȝw.ty-

tȝ.wy, Justified”

Here the full title of the initiate is given. In

translating funerary texts, it is customary to

render the long names and titles of the

deceased after their first appearance simply by “N” or “NN.” If the names and titles

remained the same throughout the

ordinances, that would be a perfectly

reasonable procedure; but since, in the

present text, they show many changes which

may be significant, it will be best to write

them out each time. We have suggested that

the Books of Breathings may belong almost

exclusively in the same family of priests of

Amon-Re at Thebes.267 In the case of this Wsỉr-Wr, “the God’s Father” and “Prophet of Amon-Re” are titles that properly go

together and denote the highest priestly

dignity.

The “god” in question is the living

pharaoh, and the initiate qualifies as his

“father” either because his “high station,

advanced age, outstanding wisdom or some

such attribute” merited the title as a courtesy

or mark of respect or affection, 268 or else

because the document’s holder actually was either the nonroyal husband of the queen and

father of the pharaoh or his real father-in-

law.269 Paradoxically, a still higher title than

“God’s Father” was “Servant of the God

( ḥm-nṯr)”; one was a servant in the capacity of “spokesman,” prophētēs, the regular

translation of ḥm-nṯr being simply

“prophet.” 270 The normal gradus honorum of the Egyptian priesthood seems to have

been from common priest ( wʿb, “pure one”) to “god’s father” to “servant of the god” or

“prophet,” 271 with “a tendency for only the highest of the ‘god’s fathers’ to be called

‘prophets.’” 272 The god in this case was properly Amon or Amon-Re, identified in

the earliest times with Min. 273 It is interesting that in our text the name of Min

(formerly read as Khem or Ham) is inserted

between two Amon-Re titles, along with the

archaic designation of “Bull-of-His Mother,”

the name taken by Min at the coronation; this indicates that what follows should be read

“upon his great throne ( s.t=f)” rather than his

“place” or “residence.”

The name of the candidate is Wsỉr-Wr,

“Osiris is Great,” or “Greatest and

Oldest.” 274 As might be expected of one holding the highest religious credentials in

the land, the same honors were held by his

father before him. The father’s name was Ns-

pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, “belonging to the primeval god of the Two Lands,” 275 and, like all the rest of the titles, has a zealously archaistic ring.

The owner of the Joseph Smith Book of

Breathings is Hor, the son of Wosirwer

( Wsỉr-Wr) and Taykhebyt. 276 The name of Hor is, as Stricker points out regarding the

father of Horsiese, anything but rare, and yet

it is definitely a family name among owners

of Breathings texts. But Stricker does find

the name of Horsiese’s mother significant: it

is Qaiqai. 277 The - qai element—as in Remni-qai, which means “my arm is

exalted”—gives something of a biblical

tinge to the name. In the Amduat, one of the

twelve goddesses of the first hour is named

Qȝy.t-ʿ, “Die hoch ist an Arm.” 278 In this case, “The name suits well with the gesture

of ‘Praising,’” 279 the raising of the arm in the temple. In some inscriptions, to be “high on

[the] arms” of one refers to a ritual embrace

in the temple. 280

What can be rendered as “the same

things,” mỉt.t, means “the like” and occurs regularly in situations in which whatever is

happening or being done by one person is

attributed to another or accrues to his credit

or benefit. This is very clear in the

Metternich Stela, where the victim suffers

snakebite as Horus did, so that he can be

healed as Horus was: whatever Horus does,

he does mỉt.t, each party being, for the

purpose of the ordinances, completely identified with the other. Since the afflicted

victim, however, is in no condition to

function, his place may be taken by yet

another, who is now, to all effects,

himself. 281 The “things” which the candidate wishes to share with Osiris are his ḫprw,

which, according to some studies, may best

be understood as the experiences he has

undergone to reach his present glorified state

—all the things he has been, usually

overtranslated as “transformations.” 282 What identified the “Osiris NN”—that is, the

candidate as Osiris—with the god Osiris in

the first instance was, as far as we can tell,

their Schicksalsgemeinschaft, or common

fate and experience in undergoing the trials

of death and resurrection, according to

Siegfried Morenz. 283 It is to this common experience that the present passage seems to

refer.

Importance and Secrecy of the

Book

Line 6: “Hide it! Hide it! Do not let any man read it!”

The word translated as “read” is ʿš,

meaning “to read aloud, call upon or appeal

to, quote, mention.” Absolute secrecy is

commanded. The idea that the Egyptians had

deep and awesome secrets has always

thrilled the man in the street and accordingly

has been deplored by the professional

Egyptologist dedicated to maintaining the

image of the scientist and avoiding any taint

of Rosicrucian hocus-pocus. In a widely

circulated comment, John Wilson wrote,

“The notion that the ancient Egyptians were

cabalistic esoterics devoted to hiding their

mysteries from others dies hard. ”284 If hiding mysteries from others makes one a cabalistic

esoteric, then the Egyptians were just that, as

were the Jewish sectaries and the early Christians. 285 The notion “dies hard”

because the Egyptian writings are full of it.

What can the line “Hide it! Hide it! Do not

let (permit) any man (to) read it!” possibly

mean if not that the author is concealing a

mystery? Egyptologists both deny and admit

the secrecy; Claas Bleeker, in his study of

the subject, states that “the texts never

mention the existence of secret societies …

[or] the existence of a kind of esoteric

wisdom, only disclosed to the initiated,”

only to add in the next breath that “mystery

proves to have been an important component

of the religious consciousness of the ancient

Egyptians. And when mystery somewhere

occurs, then the initiation into that hidden

truth or spiritual reality can not be totally

absent.” 286 Again, after announcing that there was “apparently … no authoritative myth,

and certainly no secret doctrine,” Bleeker

promptly qualifies his stand: “Yet some cultic ceremonies were celebrated, which

were so holy and which so strongly had the

character of a mystery that no one was

allowed to describe or depict them.” 287

Elsewhere he observes that “initiation

presupposes a religious secret, which is only

known to the initiated. … The faithful are, in

general, not inclined to discuss their

religious belief with outsiders. ”288

Herodotus designates the rites of Osiris as

mysteria precisely because they were

secret.289 Like the Book of the Dead, the Book of Breathings texts belong to the

hermetic writings of Thoth290 and as such were necessarily secret. The Amduat texts

are found only in concealed places, being

“holy and hidden,” known only to the

elect. 291 Such secrecy should surprise us least of all in Egypt, where the funerary

literature “swarms” with admonitions of

secrecy, according to Morenz, who quotes these very lines from our Breathings text,

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284, to illustrate. 292 The curious Greeks never penetrated beyond the

public religion of the Egyptians, whose

esoteric teachings were divulged only within

the temple walls293 and never revealed to the vulgar.294 Those secret books of directions for the temples295 were real books, of interest to both the living and the dead,

equally valid in the duat 296 and among mortals on earth, tp-tȝ.297

“To maintain that precisely ancient Egypt

should not have known some kind of

initiation—and initiation rites—like the rest

of the world,” writes Walter Federn, “is

plainly absurd, and irreconcilable with the

existence there of a hierarchy.” 298 Bleeker duly notes that “certain parts of the temples

were inaccessible to ordinary people” and

that “the Egyptian temple was not meant to let the masses of the people participate in the

religious services” ;299 that “the texts record, that people took pride in the fact that they

had beheld certain secret rites”; 300 and that some documents lift “a corner of the veil” to

hint at cultic secrets.301 Barguet finds in the Book of the Dead “nothing which permits us

to say that there was an initiation in this life

into any secret knowledge concerning certain

formulas.” 302 In which life did it occur, then, and how? The fact that the Egyptians did not

talk and write about their mysteries is taken

as proof that they did not have any; but

mystery, as the Greek visitors to Egypt knew

so well, is something one does not talk or

write about. From the earliest times,

Egyptian officials boast that they were

“initiated into the secrets of all the secret

orders, … initiated into the secrets of the

House of the Morning,” 303 without evincing

the slightest intention of telling us what those secrets were. In the Coffin Texts the dead

boasts, “I have been introduced into that

which before I was not permitted to know,

… to enter into the House of Osiris in

Busiris, to a thing which must not be made

known!” 304 The owner of a Middle Kingdom stela reports that he is (or was) “first to enter

[the temple] and last to leave [the temple],

putting my foot in a secret place. … I go

through all the ordinances correctly and

violate (reveal) none of the secrets. ”305

Bleeker concedes that, since “the essence of

godhead was mysterious … , mystery must

have played an important role in the cult,

too”; 306 and even though in later times

“people were allowed to see” the mysteries,

“it was a matter of course that they should

not talk about it or depict it for the public at

large.” Even after the general public was

invited, “the obligation of secrecy remained

in force … : ‘Do not reveal what you have seen in the mysteries of the temples.’”307

The old Egyptian word for “initiate,” bs,

had the root meaning of “secret, secret

things,” and is accordingly “a key concept

for the secret initiations and mysteries.” 308

Bs normally means “to conduct the king (into the temple, to the god), often in the sense of

to crown the king. … To install priests or the

like in their office. … To initiate one into a

secret and the like. … Rarely, to inter. ”309

The candidate in a companion text to our

Book of Breathings says to the gods: “I come

to you because I am instructed in your

secrets. ”310 The entire twelfth hour of the Amduat has to do with “the secret things

( sḫr.w) which the god performs.” 311 Bergman renders ḫry sštȝ “(in) on ( i.e., in possession of) the secret,” a very common formula,

simply as “initiated.” 312

Since it is written by the fingers of Thoth

himself (lines 30–31), our Book of Breathings is what the Egyptians of the later

period would call a hermetic book, 313 a secret document of very limited circulation.

S. Mayassis has assembled a formidable

array of classical writers who attest the

secrecy of the Egyptian religious books and

teachings; 314 one of them informs us that one had to be a priest to share any of the real

religious teachings, 315 the public being put off with myths, legends, and superstitions

that were meant to satisfy them without

giving away anything of real importance.316

There is a story told by Hermes Trismegistos

of how Asculapius pleaded with King

Ammon not to let any of the sacred writings

of Egypt be translated into Greek lest they

become the football of rhetoricians and

intellectuals who would not understand

them.317 Heliodorus says that the vulgar religion of Egypt was always trying to gain

access to and identity with the true religion, which was superesoteric, very ancient, and

very intellectual, the carefully guarded secret

of the prophets.318

Everyone knows that the Egyptians called

hieroglyphics the “divine words” and that

they were meant to conceal, if not to mystify;

they know also that in the most important

passages the scribes often resorted to

cryptograms and even spoke to each other in

code language when they discussed them; 319

it is not too much to say that the religious

texts are written in a Metasprache, or

metalanguage, to use Erik Hornung’s

expression, 320 a special

Initiationssprache. 321 The words used on the higher level could only be understood in

their true sense by the initiated. 322

Everything was in code, the nature of the

gods concealed “by a cloud of epithets,”

referring to mythological or cultic situations

which only the instructed understood; 323 the cultic images are not portraits, but

“ideograms” that must be interpreted. 324

Egyptian texts confirm the report of the

Greeks that no one was allowed to describe

or depict the mysteries in writing or

drawing325 and that it was a privilege and an honor to have set eyes on certain secret

writings. 326 To avoid a lengthy survey, let us glance at the Amduat on the subject. It was

“a secret book, known only to a single

chosen individual, perhaps the owner.” 327

Though a funerary text, parallel observations

regarding temple rituals indicate that “the

book was reserved, aside from its owner, for

the king alone.” At first His Majesty gave

permission only to very favored and

important officials to have portions of it

painted in their tombs. 328 It is called “the writing of the hidden rooms, ”329 and the

tombs in which it is found painted were all dug with the greatest secrecy; 330 the titles of the various hours are very secret and are

never found mentioned elsewhere. 331

The way of Sokar in the sand is “a secret

picture, not to be seen or scrutinized,” 332

recalling in more than one way the old Hopi

(and later Navajo) sand writings.

Cryptograms are found scattered throughout

the book to enhance the secrecy of it; the

names of the gods are written in a special

way, “normal ideograms being replaced by

hieroglyphs of secret significance,” and for

the supersecret fifth and sixth hours, even the

notes and explanations are written in

code. 333 It concludes with the same formulas of secrecy as our Book of Breathings,

declaring it to be “the chosen guidebook, the

secret writing of the duat, which is not

known by any man save the chosen one. No

one may see it. … It has been tested millions

of times.” 334 Likewise, it begins with a formula found in the preface to the Joseph

Smith text and the appendix to that of

Philippe-Jacques de Horrack: “It is

beneficial for him on earth—as truly tested

—very special, like the secret that is

written.” 335 The statement that the writing is meant only for the eyes of one person, the

owner and initiate himself, is significant

since it shows that we are dealing with the

individual salvation inherent in the

mysteries. It is “a chosen directive

( Leitfaden) … which only the chosen ( ʿnd) knows.” 336 Hence he can say, “I come to you because I am instructed in your secrets.” 337

Nothing is ever given away. Hermann

Grapow notes that the Egyptians constantly

refer to the story of Horus and Seth without ever telling it.338 Sethe has shown how the word bs, “to initiate,” is equivalent to sštȝ

and štȝ.w, “secret things. ”339 “I was initiated

by the sem-priest,” says a Coffin Text. “I do not tell it to man nor repeat it to the gods. …

I have come (entered) by virtue of ( ḥr) what I know. I do not repeat it to men, I do not tell

it to the gods.” 340 It is common to the Orphic and Phrygian as well as the Egyptian

mysteries, says Eusebius, to present “most

things by enigmas in a veiled, secret, and

symbolic theology, the most important things

of all being ta sigomena, ” the things about which no one speaks at all. 341 Nowhere are these things explained in any systematic

exposé. 342 The rites revealed to men by Osiris, the first mortal to be resurrected,

were nothing less than the great secret of

how mortals may become gods, taught in the

temple, “the place of the [great] secret. ”343

Why does Re journey in the underworld? “It

is a secret why he does it … not known by

any save the elect. No one may see it.” 344

For all the countless references to the

tragedy, “the texts provide no clear picture of the manner in which Osiris died.” 345

Plutarch says that the Egyptian priests were

very reluctant to talk about Osiris at all,

holding his story as sacred and secret. 346

The earliest Christian Apocrypha contain

the same admonitions to secrecy as their

Egyptian predecessors: “Do not permit this

book to fall into the hands of any infidel or

heretic. … Michael sustained me so that I

could behold these mysteries. ”347 Indeed, apocryphon is nothing less than a secret

teaching.

One of the main reasons that modern

scholarship denies the Egyptians their

secrets is that the Greek and Roman visitors

and students made so much of them. The

Egypt of the Greco-Roman period is

commonly designated as late and degenerate,

the sort of world in which all sorts of fraud

and humbug flourished—hence the heavy

capitalizing on the secrets of the ancients.

Modern scientific scholars are insulted by

the company of such ignorant and

superstitious informants and offended by the

suggestion that they might even have known

more about the Egyptians than we do today.

“The greater bulk of classical authority,”

wrote Alan Gardiner, “inflated by the

obscurantist preferences of medieval

mystery-mongers, had misconstrued Egypt

into a home of recondite wisdom and its

hieroglyphic inscriptions into symbols of

deep hidden truths. To such views as these—

except in circles deliberately hostile to the

results and methods of science—the

decipherment of the hieroglyphs put an end

for ever.” 348 It is comforting to know that Erman’s grammar, laboriously expanded by

Gardiner himself,349 has banished the unknown from the field of Egyptian studies.

In the same spirit students have announced

that the New Testament holds no mysteries for them since they have learned to read

Greek.

Since secrecy is a game that all humans

play from early childhood, the easiest and

most enticing of games at that, it is

remarkable that those same scholars who

regard the Egyptians as superstitious

primitives should allow them the strength of

character to avoid its pitfalls. Montet finds

secrecy a necessity among the primitive

communities of earliest Egypt, enabling “a

group of Egyptians … to recognize their own

and preserve their local life.” The special

secret knowledge preserved by each local

group was its bwt: “he who observes the bwt of his group is a pure one: he who

transgresses it is a bwty,” i.e., outcast.350

Moret noted long ago that all the arts and

sciences are secrets and have always been

treated as such. 351 But today it is precisely

the results and methods of science that

reverse this verdict, as Giorgio de Santillana

and Hertha von Dechend inform us: “We are

not in the best condition to imagine the strict

secrecy that surrounded archaic science. The

condition is so bad, indeed, that the very fact

is often regarded as a silly legend.” 352

The Book of Breathings Is

Beneficial to Both Living and Dead

Lines 6–7: “It is beneficial to a man in the next world ẖr.t-nṯr when he lives again,

having been proven true (effective) countless

(millions of) times.”

Figure 32. The relief on the lintel of the temple library, or House of Life, of Edfu shows two figures,

symbolizing eternity, holding up a scribe’s palette for the veneration of four figures representing, from left to right, all that is heard, seen, uttered, and understood beneath the heavens, ca. 200 B.C. Redrawn from

restoration by Capart, “L’exaltation du livre,” 25.

Half a dozen variations of this theme occur

in the Amduat.353 Line 15 says, “It is beneficial to him upon the earth, proven truly

( ỉw ȝḫ n=f tp tȝ sš mȝʿ).” This last

expression, “proven effective,” is very

common and is usually rendered by the

Germans as als wahr erprobt. “It benefits him in the duat very much ( ỉw ȝ ḫ=f m dȝ.t wr.t).” According to line 36, “It is useful to a man upon the earth, proven truly millions of

times.” And in line 60, we read, “It is

beneficial for a man upon the earth (and) in

the underworld ( ẖr.t-nṯr), tested truly ( sš mȝʿ).” Finally, line 167 declares, “It is

beneficial for him for whom it is done.” The

entire ceremony concludes with: “Who

knows these secret designs is a glorified

spirit well-equipped. He can go up and

down in the duat, … tested truly millions of

times.” 354

In each of these cases, it is specifically the

book that is beneficial, and, as noted in the preceding section, it is meant for the owner’s

benefit only (fig. 32). Schott observes that

the common formula “beneficial on the

earth” actually shows that we have here “a

textbook for life on the earth,” with useful

and important information, for example,

about the secrets of nature, to guide the

living as well as the dead. 355 The formula

“found useful a million times” has also been

found on a strip of cloth to be worn by a

living person.356 It is possible that one and the same document can see a person through

this life safely and on into the next, as in

Papyrus Bremner-Rhind: “It is beneficial for

him who does it upon the earth, beneficial

for him in ẖr.t-nṯr; power is given to this man (to go) into ever higher offices, (until)

he gets power over everything. ”357

Grieshammer notes that the formulas are also written in the first person, showing that the

text is to be used by the dead himself as a

prompter to get him through the tests. 358

We have translated ȝḫ as “beneficial”

rather than “useful.” The root meaning,

according to Wilson, is “usefully efficient,”

so that a wife can be “a profitable ( ȝḫ) field for her lord,” “the breath of the mouth is

beneficial ( ȝḫ) for the dead,” etc.359 In this case, however, the best rendering would

probably be “indispensable.”

H̱r.t-nṯr, usually rendered “necropolis,”

can be a good deal more than that. Goyon has

listed some of the main interpretations of

ẖr.t-nṯr, which include “the realm of the dead in the beyond ( das Totenreich im

Jenseits) , ” 360 “Domain of the God

[Osiris],” 361 Gottesboden, 362 “the holy ground where the initiation to the holy

mysteries took place, in the sacred enclosure

of the Necropolis. ”363 Federn holds that the ẖr.t-nṯr is so closely bound to the initiation that the occurrence of the term in a text may

be taken to mark it as an initiation spell. 364

“Millions of times” need not be taken

literally, as the dictionary and Hornung

assure us, since it is used to indicate a

number countless to us, though not

necessarily infinite. 365

Notes

1. To simplify reference, the lines are numbered both successively and by column/line (e.g., 48 [3/5]). The entire text of P. Louvre N. 3284 appears in chapter 4; the bold-faced words occur also in JSP XI and X.

2. Name meaning “Osiris, the Greatest and Oldest.”

3. Raymond O. Faulkner, A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1962), 87; Hermann Ranke, Die ägyptischen Personennamen (Glückstadt: Augustin, 1935), 1:176 no. 1, s.v. “archaizing.”

4. Wb 4:418–19.

5. Wb 4:419.

6. Bruno H. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,”

OMRO 23 (1942): 40–41; Jean-Claude Goyon, Le

Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279 (Cairo: IFAO, 1966), vii n.

3.

7. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, vii.

8. Siegfried Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,”

ZÄS 99 (1972): 23.

9. Étienne Drioton, “Ce que l’on sait du théâtre égyptien,”

Revue du Caire 1 (1938): 218, cited in S. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne (Athens: BAOA, 1957), 43.

10. Philippe Derchain, Le Papyrus Salt 825 (B.M. 10051): Rituel pour la conservation de la vie en Égypte (Brussels: Palais des Académies, 1965), 1:19.

11. Joachim Spiegel, “Das Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” ASAE 53 (1956): 348–52.

12. Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zur altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Das “Denkmal memphitischer

Theologie” der Schabakostein des Britischen

Museums (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928), 8–10, 16–18.

13. Wilhelm Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” ZÄS 76 (1940): 24.

14. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:133.

15. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:136.

16. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:134.

17. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:68.

18. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:128.

19. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:135.

20. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:135; Siegfried Schott, Die Deutung der Geheimnisse des Rituals für die

Abwehr des Bösen: Eine altägyptische Übersetzung (Wiesbaden: Akademie der Wissenschaften und der

Literatur in Mainz, 1954), 165 (23).

21. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:134; 2: pl. 15.

22. Giuseppe Botti, “Il Libro del Respirare e un suo nuovo esemplare nel Papiro demotico n. 766 del Museo Egizio di Torino,” JEA 54 (1968): 223.

23. Siegfried Schott, “Nut spricht als Mutter und Sarg,” RdE

17 (1965): 86; Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 83, 87.

24. Botti, “Il Libro del Respirare,” 224.

25. Wb 4:171–74.

26. Walter Wreszinski, “Das Buch vom Durchwandeln der Ewigkeit nach einer Stele im Vatikan,” ZÄS 45 (1908): 115, 119.

27. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 86.

28. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 83.

29. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 85.

30. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 24.

31. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, vii–viii.

32. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 76.

33. P. Leiden T 32 8/9, in Bruno H. Stricker, “De Egyptische mysteriën: Pap. Leiden T 32,” OMRO 37 (1956): 60.

34. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 76.

35. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, vii.

36. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 64.

37. Cf. Hermann Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien (Totenbuch Kapitel 69 und 70) (Berlin: Akademie-

Verlag, 1954), 265–66.

38. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 64–65.

39. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 87.

40. Siegfried Schott, Die Schrift der verborgenen Kammer in Königsgräbern der 18. Dynastie (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1958), 362–63.

41. Max Siebourg, “Neue Goldblättchen mit griechischen Aufschriften,” Archiv für Religionswissenschaft 10

(1907): 393–99.

42. Siegfried Morenz, “Rechts und links im Totengericht,”

ZÄS 82 (1957): 67; Gerardus van der Leeuw, “The SUMBOLA [ Symbola] in Firmicus Maternus,”

Egyptian Religion 1 (1933): 65–66; Hugh W. Nibley,

“Sparsiones,” Classical Journal 40 (1945): 515–43, reprinted in The Ancient State: The Rulers and the Ruled, CWHN 10:148–94.

43. See Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 24–

25.

44. Alexandre Piankoff, Le Livre du Jour et de la Nuit (Cairo: IFAO, 1942), ix; see also Leonard H. Lesko, The Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), 2, 69, 80; Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 355.

45. Erik Hornung, Das Amduat: Die Schrift des verborgenen Raumes (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1963–

67), 2:81, emphasis added.

46. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:83–85.

47. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:174.

48. [Ancient Egyptian ritual texts often divide themselves into various hours, usually taking twelve hours to finish—

eds.]

49. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:85.

50. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:167.

51. Hans Schack-Schackenburg, Das Buch von den zwei Wegen des seligen Toten ( Zweiwegebuch) (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1903), 8–9, quotation on 8.

52. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 135.

53. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 23.

54. Wb 1:183.

55. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 24.

56. Nibley, “Sparsiones,” 538–43, reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN 10:162–64; and Hugh W. Nibley, “The Arrow,

the Hunter, and the State,” Western Political Quarterly 2/3 (1949): 335–36, reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN

10:9–10.

57. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 25.

58. Schott, Deutung der Geheimnisse des Rituals für die Abwehr des Bösen, 175 (33).

59. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 363–64.

60. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:63–64.

61. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:67.

62. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:71.

63. PT 267 §367, in Raymond O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969), 76.

64. BD 100.

65. Schott, Deutung der Geheimnisse des Rituals für die

Abwehr des Bösen, 175 (33).

66. Nathaniel J. Reich, “An Abbreviated Demotic Book of the Dead: A Palaeographical Study of Papyrus British Museum 10072,” JEA 17 (1931): 86.

67. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, viii, 76.

68. Morenz, “Rechts und links im Totengericht,” 67.

69. Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 40–41.

70. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, vii n. 3.

71. Reich, “Abbreviated Demotic Book of the Dead,” 86.

72. Van der Leeuw, “Symbola in Firmicus Maternus,” 65–

70.

73. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 87.

74. P. Leiden T 32 7/24–25, in Stricker, “De Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 37 (1956): 59.

75. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 49–

50.

76. Cf. Reinhard Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1970), 8–9; Eberhard Otto, review of The Egyptian Coffin Texts VII: Texts of Spells 787–1185, by Adriaan de Buck, ZDMG 113 (1963): 197–98.

77. Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 42.

78. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 50.

79. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 24.

80. Botti, “Il Libro del Respirare,” 228.

81. Hugh W. Nibley, “As Things Stand at the Moment,”

BYU Studies 9/1 (1968): 74–79.

82. Jan Bergman, Ich bin Isis: Studien zum memphitischen

Hintergrund der griechischen Isisaretalogien (Uppsala: Berlingska, 1968), 235.

83. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 236.

84. See Dieter Müller, “I Am Isis,” review of Ich bin Isis, by Jan Bergman, OLZ 67 (1972): 121, emphasis in original.

85. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 23–24.

86. Georges Posener, “Un dieu écrivain: Le Thot égyptien,”

Annuaire du Collège de France 62 (1961–62): 289, in Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 22.

87. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 24; PT

539 §1305c.

88. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 23.

89. Siegfried Schott, “Die Opferliste als Schrift des Thoth,”

ZÄS 90 (1963): 103–10; Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 20.

90. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 22.

91. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 25.

92. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 24.

93. Sethe, Dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus, 1:20.

94. Francis Ll. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis (Oxford: Clarendon, 1900), 93, 105–9, 185–87.

95. BD 137A, in Paul Barguet, Le Livre des Morts des anciens égyptiens (Paris: Cerf, 1967), 181.

96. Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca (Library) 1.25; see also Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride (Of Isis and Osiris) 27; Athenagoras Atheniensis, Suppl., in Theodor Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae (Bonn:

Marcus and Weber, 1922), 344.

97. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 20–21.

98. Iamblichus, De mysteriis (Of the Mysteries) 1.1, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 497.

99. P. Leiden T 32 2/2–3, in Stricker, “De egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 56.

100. Alexandre Moret, Mystères égyptiens (Paris: Colin, 1913), 97.

101. S. G. F. Brandon, “The Significance of Time in Some Ancient Initiatory Rituals,” in Initiation, ed. Claas J.

Bleeker (Leiden: Brill, 1965), 42, emphasis in original.

102. Wolfgang Helck, “Die Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” ArOr 20 (1952): 84.

103. Jaroslav Černý, Ancient Egyptian Religion (London: Hutchinson’s University Library, 1952), 35; Theodor Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris (Prague:

Orientalisches Institut, 1940–41), 1:16; Alexandre Moret,

“La légende d’Osiris à l’époque thébaine d’après

l’hymne à Osiris du Louvre,” BIFAO 30 (1931): 725–50.

104. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:15; and Moret, “Légende d’Osiris à l’époque thébaine,” 738 n.

38.

105. Alexandre Moret, Du caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 148.

106. Raymond Weill, “L’incantation anti-Osirienne insérée dans la composition du chapitre Pyramides 1264–1279,”

BIFAO 46 (1947): 159–60.

107. Adolf Rusch, “Ein Osirisritual in den Pyramidentexten,”

ZÄS 60 (1925): 16–39.

108. Jan Zandee, Death as an Enemy: According to Ancient Egyptian Conceptions, trans. Mrs. W. F.

Klasens (Leiden: Brill, 1960), 210–12.

109. Helck, “Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” 72.

110. Helck, “Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” 83–

85.

111. Černý, Ancient Egyptian Religion, 35.

112. Rusch, “Ein Osirisritual in den Pyramidentexten,” 33–

35, gives examples.

113. Heinrich K. Brugsch, “Das Osiris-Mysterium von Tentyra,” ZÄS 19 (1881): 77–78.

114. Erik Hornung, review of The Origins of Osiris, by J.

Gwyn Griffiths, OLZ 65 (1970): 17.

115. As reported in Hornung, review of The Origins of Osiris, 18.

116. Siegfried Schott, Mythe und Mythenbildung im alten Ägypten (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1945), 10.

117. Weill, “L’incantation anti-Osirienne,” 159–97, citing PT

534 §§1276–79.

118. Louis Speleers, “La résurrection et la toilette du mort selon les Textes des Pyramides,” RdE 3 (1938): 38.

119. Gertrud Thausing, Sein und Werden: Versuch einer Ganzheitsschau der Religion des Pharaonenreiches (Vienna: Stiglmayr, 1971), 125, 145.

120. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 109, 122.

121. Eugène Revillout, Rituel funéraire de Pamonth en démotique (Paris: Leroux, 1888), 2:v.

122. Schott, “Nut spricht als Mutter und Sarg,” 86.

123. Alexandre Moret, Kings and Gods of Egypt (New York: Putnam, 1912), 78.

124. Erik Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971), 154–55; English trans., Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many, trans. John Baines (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1982), 160–61.

125. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 155; English trans., 161–62.

126. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 386.

127. E. A. Wallis Budge, Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection (New York: Dover, 1973), 2:141.

128. Gertrud Thausing, Der Auferstehungsgedanke in ägyptischen religiösen Texten (Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 1943), 16.

129. Jan Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 58.

130. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:56–57.

131. Sigmund Mowinckel, Religion und Kultus (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1953), 70.

132. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 146–47.

133. BD 15, in E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Dead: The Papyrus of Ani, Scribe and Treasurer of the Temples of Egypt, about B.C. 1450 (New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1913), 2:498; 3: pl. 20.

134. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:4.

135. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2: 40.

136. Gertrud Thausing and Traudl Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das

grosse ägyptische Totenbuch (Papyrus Reinisch) der Papyrussammlung der Österreichischen

Nationalbibliothek (Cairo: Österreichisches Kulturinstitut, 1969), 20–22.

137. Hermann Junker, Die Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien nach den Inschriften von Dendera, Edfu und Philae (Vienna: Hölder, 1910), 42–43.

138. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 367–

68.

139. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 370.

140. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 16–17, in Constantin E.

Sander-Hansen, Die religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre (Copenhagen: Levin and

Munksgaard, 1937), 14–15.

141. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:4.

142. Alexandre Piankoff, “The Sky-Goddess Nut and the Night Journey of the Sun,” JEA 20 (1934): 59.

143. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 353–54.

144. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 340.

145. Charles Kuentz, “Autour d’une conception égyptienne méconnue: L’ akhit ou soi-disant horizon,” BIFAO 17

(1920): 126, 168, cited in Bernard Couroyer, “La terre du Dieu,” Revue biblique 78 (1971): 60–61.

146. Hugh W. Nibley, “Tenting, Toll, and Taxing,” Western Political Quarterly 19 (1966): 599–619, reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN 10:33–57.

147. Erik Hornung, “Politische Planung und Realität im alten Ägypten,” Saeculum 22 (1971): 54–57.

148. Nibley, “Tenting, Toll, and Taxing,” 625–27, reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN 10:64–66.

149. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 213; Wb 1:17.

150. Shabako stone, line 63, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 73.

151. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 87; English trans., 96.

152. Cited in E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Dead: Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, A.nhai, Kerāsher and Netchemet (London: British Museum, 1899), 34.

153. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 23.

154. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:35–36.

155. Hartwig Altenmüller, review of Das Amduat, by Erik Hornung, OLZ 61 (1966): 446.

156. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:87.

157. BD 17, in Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:378; 3: pl. 7.

158. Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 158.

159. Hermann Junker, Die politische Lehre von Memphis (Berlin: Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1941), 62–63.

160. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 41–42, 44–45; English trans., 52–56; Pierre Gilbert, “Les idées des noms solaires royaux à l’Ancien Empire,” CdE 12

(1936): 255–65; cf. William J. Perry, “The Cult of the Sun and the Cult of the Dead in Egypt,” JEA 11 (1925): 191–200, and a reply in Aylward M. Blackman, “Osiris or the Sun God? A Reply to Mr. Perry,” JEA 11 (1925):

201–9.

161. Heinrich Schäfer, “Altägyptische Bilder der auf- und untergehenden Sonne,” ZÄS 71 (1935): 37.

162. See below, commentary to line 57, pp. 256–63.

163. François Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” ASAE 51 (1951): 400.

164. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 99, discussing BD 110.

165. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 17.

166. Hermann Kees, Totenglauben und Jenseitsvorstellungen der alten Ägypter: Grundlagen und Entwicklung bis zum Ende des mittleren Reiches (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1926), 291.

167. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:54–55.

168. Gaballa A. Gaballa and Kenneth A. Kitchen, “The Festival of Sokar,” Or 38 (1969): 45.

169. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 87; English trans., 96.

170. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 393.

171. P. Bremner-Rhind 10/10–12, in Raymond O. Faulkner, The Papyrus Bremner-Rhind (British Museum No.

10188) (Brussels: FERE, 1933), 18–19.

172. Sinuhe (R) 5–8 (P. Berlin 10499), in Adolf Erman, Literarische Texte des Mittleren Reiches (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1908–9), 2: tab. 1–1a.

173. Cited in E. M. Wolf-Brinkmann, review of A Study of the Ba Concept in Ancient Egyptian Texts, by Louis V.

Žabkar, OLZ 66 (1971): 133.

174. Iamblichus, Of the Mysteries 8.6.

175. Wolf-Brinkmann, review of A Study of the Ba Concept, 132.

176. Wolf-Brinkmann, review of A Study of the Ba Concept, 134.

177. Louis V. Žabkar, “Some Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition of the Book of the Dead,” JNES 24 (1965): 85–

86.

178. Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du mort,” 39.

179. Louis Speleers, Textes des Cerceuils du Moyen Empire égyptien (Brussels: n.p., 1946), xiii–xiv; cf.

Jacques Pirenne, “Âme et vie d’outre-tombe chez les égyptiens de l’Ancien Empire,” CdE 34 (1959): 208–13.

180. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 11.

181. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 8.

182. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 11; cf. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 66–68.

183. Zandee, Death as an Enemy, 19, 176.

184. George Nagel, “Un papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire (Louvre 3292 [inv.]),” BIFAO 29 (1929): 19.

185. Adolf Erman, Der Leidener Amonshymnus (Berlin: Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1923), 75; Erman, Literarische Texte des Mittleren Reiches, 2: table 3 line 70.

186. PT 305 §474, in Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du

mort,” 39.

187. Alexandre Piankoff, “Les deux papyrus

‘mythologiques’ de Her-Ouben au Musée du Caire,”

ASAE 49 (1949): 133.

188. Žabkar, “Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition,” 85.

189. Wolf-Brinkmann, review of A Study of the Ba Concept, 133.

190. Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 58.

191. Cited in Wolf-Brinkmann, review of A Study of the Ba Concept, 132.

192. Winfried Barta, review of The Report about the Dispute of a Man with His Ba, by Hans Goedicke, BiOr 29 (1972): 24.

193. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 366–

67.

194. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 368.

195. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 373.

196. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 391.

197. Hans Bonnet, Reallexikon der ägyptischen Religionsgeschichte, 2nd ed. (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971), 75–76.

198. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 367.

199. CT 101, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:102–3.

200. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 50–52; English trans., 60–62.

201. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 11.

202. CT 155, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:290–91.

203. Günther Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten (Jena: Diederichs, 1915), 149; Charles Maystre,

“Le Livre de la Vache du Ciel dans les tombeaux de la vallée des Rois,” BIFAO 40 (1941): 102–3.

204. PT 223 §215b; cf. Kurt Sethe, Die altägyptische Pyramidentexte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1908–22), 1:123.

205. See Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:162–63.

206. CT 38, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:162.

207. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 11.

208. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 40 n. 5; BD 125; 17.

209. CT 96, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:77–78.

210. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 19, discussing BD 85, included in JSP V and VI.

211. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 10.

212. Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 60.

213. Eberhard Otto, “Sprüche auf altägyptischen Särgen,”

ZDMG 102 (1952): 197.

214. Étienne Drioton, review of The Egyptian Coffin Texts, by Adriaan de Buck, BiOr 10 (1953): 167.

215. Alice Grenfell, “The Ka on Scarabs,” RT 37 (1915): 80.

216. Clement, Epistola I ad Corinthios (First Epistle to the Corinthians) 25, in PG 1:201.

217. Zandee, Death as an Enemy, 176.

218. Jan Zandee, review of Les dieux de l’Égypte, by François Daumas, BiOr 24 (1967): 41.

219. Sources in S. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire de l’anté-diluvien à Sumer-Babylone: La familiarité divine originelle (Athens: BAOA, 1961), 8.

220. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 71.

221. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:53–54.

222. Selim Bey Hassan, “A Representation of the Solar Disk with Human Hands and Arms and the Form of Horus of Beḥdet, as Seen on the Stele of Amenhetep IInd in the Mud-Brick Temple at Giza,” ASAE 38 (1938): 54.

223. Raymond O. Faulkner, A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1962), 33.

224. H. R. Hall, quoted in Alexandre Piankoff, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon (New York: Pantheon, 1955), 11.

225. Cf. László Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 101.

226. Cited in Eberhard Otto, Gott und Mensch nach den ägyptischen Tempelinschriften der griechisch-römischen Zeit: Eine Untersuchungen zur

Phraseologie der Tempelinschriften (Heidelberg: Winter, 1964), 49.

227. For entering the horizon with his father Re, see above, commentary to line 2, pp. 107–9.

228. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:88.

229. Battiscombe Gunn, “Notes on the Aten and His Names,” JEA 9 (1923): 168–72.

230. Elmer G. Suhr, “The Sphinx,” Folklore 81 (1970): 100.

231. Stricker, “Egyptische mysterien,” OMRO 34 (1953): 14.

232. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:165–67.

233. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:165–67.

234. Charles Autran, “Sothis-Sirius et le monde préhellénique,” MIFAO 66 (1935–38): 534, 542–43, quotations on 542.

235. Autran, “Sothis-Sirius,” 543–44.

236. Autran, “Sothis-Sirius,” 529.

237. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 38.

238. László Kákosy, “Probleme der ägyptischen Jenseitsvorstellungen in der Ptolemäer- und Kaiserzeit,”

in REHR, 62.

239. CT 62, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:270–71.

240. Zandee, Death as an Enemy, 9.

241. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 371.

242. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 374.

243. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 389–

90; cf. PT 256 §301; the eclipse motif again?

244. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 393.

245. Reproduced in Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire, 587 fig. 98.

246. K. Kohler, “The Pre-Talmudic Haggada, II,” JQR, o.s., 7 (1894–95): 597.

247. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 368; cf. PT 222 §205.

248. Schott, “Nut spricht als Mutter und Sarg,” 81, 84; Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 371–73, in Sander-Hansen, Religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre, 118.

249. Hermann Grapow, “Die Himmelsgöttin Nut als Mutterschwein,” ZÄS 71 (1935): 45.

250. PT 565 §1427–28, in Schott, “Nut Spricht als Mutter und Sarg,” 86.

251. Paul Barguet, review of The Pyramid of Unas: Texts Translated with Commentary, by Alexandre Piankoff, RHR 177 (1970): 68.

252. Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” 376.

253. Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” 376–77, 381 n. 3.

254. Grapow, “Himmelsgöttin Nut als Mutterschwein,” 45.

255. Adolf Rusch, Die Entwicklung der Himmelsgöttin Nut zu einer Totengottheit (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1922), 47–62.

256. James H. Breasted, Ancient Records of Egypt (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1906–7), 2:68 no.

164.

257. Hans O. Lange and Otto Neugebauer, Papyrus Carlsberg No. I: Ein hieratisch-demotischer

kosmologischer Text (Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1940), 43.

258. Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” 377.

259. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 154–55; English trans., 161.

260. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:192; 2:184.

261. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 355;

cf. PT 259 §313.

262. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 373; cf. PT 225 §222.

263. Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” 17; BD 1; cf. PT 536

§1295.

264. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 57.

265. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:162–63.

266. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:81.

267. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34 (1953): 13.

268. Alan H. Gardiner, Ancient Egyptian Onomastica (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1947), 1:51*.

269. Gardiner, Ancient Egyptian Onomastica, 1:50*–51*.

Cyril Aldred, “The End of the El-ʿAmārna Period,” JEA 43 (1957): 36–37, finds unacceptable the idea that any subject of the pharaoh except one actually related to him should presume to such a title.

270. Gardiner, Ancient Egyptian Onomastica, 1:47*–48*, 52*.

271. Gardiner, Ancient Egyptian Onomastica, 1:47*–48*.

272. Gardiner, Ancient Egyptian Onomastica, 1:49*.

273. Gardiner, Ancient Egyptian Onomastica, 1:52*.

274. Hermann Kees, Der Götterglaube im alten Ägypten (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1941), 172.

275. See Hermann Ranke, Die ägyptischen Personennamen (Glückstadt: Augustin, 1935), 1:176 no.

1; cf. 1:175 no. 22.

276. The name Taykhebyt is treated in chapter 2 above, p. 2

n. 5.

277. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34 (1953): 13.

278. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:6 no. 19; 2:13.

279. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:13.

280. Eberhard Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue seit dem neuen Reich,” Or 17 (1948): 466.

281. For the Osiris title, see below, commentary to line 8, pp.

132–34.

282. On transformations, see below, commentary to line 37, pp. 299–301.

283. Siegfried Morenz, “Das Problem des Werdens zu Osiris in der griechisch-römischen Zeit Ägyptens,” in REHR, 77.

284. John A. Wilson, Signs and Wonders upon Pharaoh: A History of American Egyptology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964), 19.

285. See Morton Smith, The Secret Gospel (New York: Harper and Row, 1973), 72–138.

286. Claas J. Bleeker, “Initiation in Ancient Egypt,” in Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 50.

287. Bleeker, “Initiation in Ancient Egypt,” 53.

288. Claas J. Bleeker, “Some Introductory Remarks on the Significance of Initiation,” in Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 16.

289. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 231; Herodotus, Histories 2.171.

290. Edouard H. Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch der XVIII. bis XX. Dynastie (Berlin: Asher, 1886), intro.

vol.: 25.

291. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:13; 2:24.

292. Siegfried Morenz, Ägyptische Religion (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1960), 237–38.

293. George Foucart, “La belle fête de la vallée,” BIFAO 24

(1924): 3–4.

294. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 25.

295. BD 162 end, in Barguet, Livre des Morts, 229.

296. BD 137A, in Barguet, Livre des Morts, 181.

297. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 127.

298. Walter Federn, “The ‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts: A New Approach,” JNES 19 (1960): 247.

299. Bleeker, “Initiation in Ancient Egypt,” 50–51.

300. Bleeker, “Initiation in Ancient Egypt,” 55.

301. Bleeker, “Initiation in Ancient Egypt,” 56.

302. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 24–25.

303. Étienne Drioton, “Description sommaire des chapelles funéraires de la VIe Dynastie récemment découvertes derrière le mastaba de Mérérouka à Sakkarah,” ASAE

43 (1943): 502.

304. Kees, Totenglauben, 321–22.

305. George Daressy, “Monuments d’Edfou datant du Moyen Empire,” ASAE 18 (1919): 49–50.

306. Claas J. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals: Enactments of Religious Renewal (Leiden: Brill, 1967), 47–48, quotation on 47.

307. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 49; see also Claas J.

Bleeker, “The Religion of Ancient Egypt,” in Religions of the Past (Leiden: Brill, 1969), 48–49.

308. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 231; Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 45.

309. Wb 1:473.

310. P. Louvre N. 3292 D/4, in Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 23–24.

311. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 347.

312. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 120 n. 3.

313. Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, intro. vol: 25.

314. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 561–64.

315. Plutarch, Quaestiones romanae (The Roman Questions) 99.

316. For sources, see Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 25; Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte

ancienne, 30.

317. Pseudo-Apuleius, Asclepius 1.77, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 619.

318. Heliodorus, Aethiopica 3.16.3–4.

319. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 9.

320. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 113; rendered

“metalanguage” in the English trans., 124.

321. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 147.

322. Wilhelm Czermak, “Vom großen Gedanken Ägyptens,”

Archiv für ägyptische Archäologie 1 (1938): 212.

323. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 81; English trans., 90.

324. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 106; English trans., 117.

325. Bleeker, “Initiation in Ancient Egypt,” 53.

326. Bleeker, “Initiation in Ancient Egypt,” 55.

327. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 370.

328. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 370.

329. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 334–35.

330. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 321.

331. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 360.

332. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:64; 2:82.

333. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 338.

334. Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:25–26.

335. E.g., Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:135.

336. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 348.

337. P. Louvre N. 3292 D/4, in Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 23–24.

338. Hermann Grapow, Das 17. Kapitel des ägyptischen Totenbuches und seine religionsgeschichtliche

Bedeutung (Berlin: Paul, 1912), 23.

339. Kurt Sethe, Die Sprüche für das Kennen der Seelen der heiligen Orte (Kap. 107–109, 111–116 des

ägyptischen Totenbuchs) (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1925), 51, 87–88, 96.

340. CT 156, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:316–21, B4Lb; note the chiasm.

341. Eusebius, Praeparatio evangelica (Preparation for the Gospel) 3.1, in PG 21:156.

342. Étienne Drioton and Jacques Vandier, L’Égypte: Dès origines à la conquête d’Alexandre (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1938), 99.

343. Moret, Caractère religieux, 148–49, quotation in 148

n. 5.

344. Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:25–26.

345. Claas J. Bleeker, “Isis and Nephthys as Wailing Women,” Numen 5 (1958): 12.

346. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:283.

347. Gospel of Bartholomew, in E. A. Wallis Budge, Coptic Apocrypha in the Dialect of Upper Egypt (London: British Museum, 1913), 17.

348. Alan H. Gardiner, “The Geography of the Exodus,” in Recueil d’études égyptologiques: Dédiées à la

mémoire de Jean-François Champollion (Paris: Champion, 1922), 203.

349. Adolf Erman, Neuägyptische Grammatik, 2nd ed.

(Leipzig: Engelmann, 1933), expanded by Alan H.

Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1966).

350. Pierre Montet, “Le fruit défendu,” Kêmi 11 (1950): 115.

351. Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 131.

352. Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill: An Essay on Myth and the Frame of Time (Boston: Gambit, 1969), 310.

353. Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:2, 4, 6, 15.

354. Cf. P. Bremner-Rhind 26/7, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 57.

355. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 362–63.

356. Abd el-Moḥsen Bakir, “The Cairo Calendar of Lucky and Unlucky Days,” ASAE 48 (1948): 428.

357. P. Bremner-Rhind 23/15–16, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 47.

358. Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 10.

359. John A. Wilson, The Culture of Ancient Egypt (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1956), 67–68.

360. Wb 3:394, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 39

n. 4.

361. T. George Allen, The Egyptian Book of the Dead: Documents in the Oriental Institute Museum at the University of Chicago (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960), cited in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N.

3279, 39 n. 4.

362. Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” 12 n. 4, cited in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 39 n. 4, and cited in Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 252 n.

115.

363. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 252

and n. 115, cited in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N.

3279, 39 n. 4.

364. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 252

and n. 115.

365. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 164; English trans., 170.

Color Plates

Plate 1. Joseph Smith Papyrus I (source of Facsimile 1). © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

Plate 2. Joseph Smith Papyrus XI. © Intellectual

Reserve, Inc.

Plate 3. Joseph Smith Papyrus X. © Intellectual

Reserve, Inc.

Plate 4. Joseph Smith Papyrus II. © Intellectual

Reserve, Inc.

Plate 5. Joseph Smith Papyrus III. © Intellectual

Reserve, Inc.

Plate 6. Joseph Smith Papyrus IV. © Intellectual

Reserve, Inc.

Plate 7. Joseph Smith Papyri V (right) and VI (left).

© Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

Plate 8. Seti I, assisted by Isis, anoints the Osiris standard of Abydos. Temple of Seti I, Abydos.

Painting by Amice M. Calverly. Courtesy of the

Egyptian Exploration Society.

Plate 9. Seti I unwraps the white-robed image of

Osiris. Temple of Seti I, Abydos. Painting by Amice M. Calverly. Courtesy of the Egyptian Exploration

Society.

Plate 10. Birth of the sun. Final chapter of the Book of Caverns. Tomb of Tausert, ca. 1190 B.C. Courtesy of Araldo DeLuca/White Star.

Plate 11. The Lady of the Sycamore offers

refreshment to the high priest Userhat, his wife and mother. He and his wife appear as two pairs of ba-birds. Reconstruction from tomb of Userhat, ca. 1320

B.C.

Commentary, Part 2

Initiation Rites and Entering the

Temple

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 8–14

8. Speak the words (Recite as follows):

Hail, Osiris, God’s Father and Prophet of

Amon-Re King of the Gods, Prophet of

Min-

9. Amon, Wsỉr-Wr [ JSP: Hor], Justified, son of one of like offices, Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy

[ JSP: born to Tay[khebyt]], Justified!

Thou art pure,

10 (1/10). thy heart is pure, cleansed is thy

front with washing, thy back with

cleansing water ( twr + water ideogram), thine inward parts with soda and natron.

11. No member of thine causeth offense.

Purified is the Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of [ JSP: born of]

12. Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy [ JSP: Taykhebyt], Justified, in the (these) standing waters of the Meadows of Rest on the north side

13. of the Field of Grasshoppers. Edjo

(Wȝḏy.t, Uto) and Nekhbet have made

thee pure in the eighth [ JSP: fourth]

hour of the night,

14. in the eighth [ JSP: fourth] hour of the day.

Commentary

Line 8: “Speak the words (Recite as follows)”

The formula is rendered by Alan Gardiner

as “the speaking of words.” 1 It is usually written in red ink as instructions for the

reader rather than as part of the sacred text,

and it indicates that a priest is to speak aloud

what follows; it also shows that the text

contains ordinances in which a number of persons are participating. 2 In the longer Book of Breathings, the expression is written

in red ink to allow the narrators to follow the

progress of the ceremonies without

difficulty, suggesting to Goyon that at some

time this version of the Book of Breathings,

“like the Book of the Dead, was recited in

the course of the funeral ceremonies.” 3 In most texts, according to László Kákosy, the

ḏd mdw (“speaking of words”) formula had

lost all real significance by the second half

of Ptolemaic times.4

The Osiris Title: The Candidate as

an Osiris

Line 8: “Hail, Osiris (NN)!”

The word for “hail ( hȝy)” is a ritual

greeting and always expresses joy and

rejoicing. 5 The initiate is anything but a

doomed soul entering the last mile into eternal night. Note that the candidate’s titles

are being progressively reduced. From the

full titulary in lines 4–6 we find that “Bull-

of-His-Mother, upon his great throne” has

been dropped in lines 8–9, and by lines 11–

12 all that is left are the names of the

candidate and his father with the priestly title

“God’s Father” and the indispensable

“Justified.” It is significant that the most

exalted titles, and those of which the owner

should be proudest—including that of

“Prophet” —are the very ones omitted. Can

it be that such offices are mere formalities,

survivals from the original coronation

ceremony, part of the package that the scribe

would copy down?

For this phase of the ordinances, the

subject is “an Osiris.” The Osiris name that

is assumed by all initiates at the outset is,

Erik Hornung insists, merely “a title or

assigned role ( Rollenbezeichnung)” and does not indicate real identity with the god,

but shows, rather, “that through death the

individual enters into a role prepared for

him, designated by the name of Osiris.” 6

Identification with Osiris was strictly “a

legal identification,” according to Étienne

Drioton and Jacques Vandier, 7 guaranteeing the dead “the privileges of Osiris.” The fact

that the individual, here and throughout,

always retains his personal name shows that

he is never absorbed into Osiris to the point

of losing his own identity. Indeed, at the

moment of reversing his course and directing

his steps toward heaven, Unas, according to

Joachim Spiegel, shed his Osiris title, which

befitted him only in the world of the dead, to

become a Horus. 8 As a Horus, the king rises above the status of Osiris. 9

On the other hand, Walter Federn

maintains that the designation “Osiris So-

and-so” indicates “an absolute certainty of identity with the divinity, a certainty that

might be termed ‘mystical,’” 10 and cites Siegfried Morenz’s study of the subject. The

latter notes that in the classical period there

was a conspicuous tendency to adapt texts

dealing with the rites of Osiris (whether

from temples or libraries) for use as private

funerary texts, 11 signifying an increasingly close and literal identification of the god

with the defunct human—a steady “thinning

of the boundary” between their natures12

until that boundary completely disappeared.

The removal of all distance between god and

man was un-Egyptian, according to Morenz,

who attributes it to Greek influence, 13 but at the same time it expressed a typically

Egyptian wish to be as near to the god as

possible hereafter. 14 It is possible, Morenz concedes, that “optimal proximity to the

god,” as illustrated in funerary drawings,

might well signify “becoming Osiris” as “a new form of existence for the deceased, ”15

who, through ritual, acquired the nature of

the god.16 Kákosy uses the word transubstantiation to explain the sense in which the individual became an Osiris

completely and totally17 and detects instances of a special kind in which the dead

took on “a new Osirian form,” becoming

another type of being, before he could enjoy

complete identification with the god.18 The essence of the mysteries, according to

Hermann Kees, was to become “a follower

of Osiris.” 19 The embalming itself “was but an imitation of a treatment which the dead

god Osiris was believed to have been the

first to receive; the dead person, therefore,

became an Osiris.” 20 To enjoy the blessing of Osiris—eternal life—one must do the

works and suffer the vicissitudes of Osiris;21

hence the embalming table takes the same form as the altar of sacrifice: that of a lion

couch. 22 As Gunther Roeder puts it, one becomes an Osiris only “by literally

undergoing all the experiences of Osiris. ”23

The double prehistoric aspect of Osiris as

dying vegetation-god and earthly king

renders “the character of Osiris one of the

most difficult problems presented by ancient

Egyptian religion”; 24 but however conflicting the two roles of Re and Osiris may seem,

both have in common the ability to overcome

the powers of death and destruction and are

thus fit to rule and lead. “According to the

Egyptians,” writes Brede Kristensen, “man

becomes in death the peer of the gods. Again

and again he identifies himself with the

victors of death, more especially with Re

and Osiris. … The mystery of eternal life is

identical for men and gods in every

respect.” 25 “Behold, I shall be with Osiris,

and my perfection shall be his perfection among the great gods. ”26 Iamblichus says that the initiate becomes like the immortals when

he is filled with the spirit of Osiris. 27 This intense personal relationship is reflected in

the intimate feelings of the common people

toward Osiris, displayed in the great variety

of ways in which his name is found written

among them, each representing some

attribute of the god that had a special appeal

to some ordinary individual; this, Adolf

Erman concluded, was evidence of the great

popular appeal ( Volkstümlichkeit) of

Osiris.28

Mȝʿ-ḫrw, Justified

Line 9: “Justified”

This is the famous mȝʿ-ḫrw formula.

Deciphering the idea of mȝʿ-ḫrw “has

exhausted the efforts of Egyptologists,”

wrote Alexandre Moret. 29 The usual rendering of mȝʿ-ḫrw is to “be justified,

vindicated, … [hence] triumphant. ”30

Gardiner interprets it as “‘True of voice,’ an

epithet added to the names of dead persons

and hence often practically equivalent to our

‘deceased.’” 31 Paul Barguet also notes that though the title indicates that the dead “has

been declared just before the tribunal, … it

often means simply the equivalent of our ‘the

late So-and-so.’” 32 Thus in plain Anglo-Saxon, “Osiris NN mȝʿ-ḫrw” may be read,

“Osiris NN, who is dead”; and though, as

noted, the rites engage and concern both the

living and the dead, it is significant that the

mȝʿ-ḫrw title is applied almost always to the dead—which is not surprising since the texts

came from tombs. Yet even here there are

exceptions; one man declares, “I was one

declared mȝʿ-ḫrw on earth.” 33 Gertrud Thausing sees it characterizing a

Zwischenstadium—having a foot in either world, being “on the soul’s path of exaltation

between death and resurrection” or, on

another level, (on) the path of the initiate on

earth.34 The condition thus applies in both worlds, and Moret noted that to rule as an

earthly king “was to renew on earth the

condition of existence enjoyed by the

celestial mȝʿ-ḫrw.” 35

It has been maintained that the concept of

mȝʿ-ḫrw originated in the law courts, 36 the archetypal case calling for vindication or

justification of the candidate being that

which, by justifying Horus, established his

claim to the throne of his father.37 Rudolf Anthes says that mȝʿ-ḫrw in the Pyramid

Texts probably means “the acclaim given to

him is ‘right,’” meaning that the acclaim

given to the new king at his coronation is

confirmed by the priestly court at Heliopolis,

which is “empowered to pronounce the

acclaim of rightness ( mȝʿ-ḫrw=f) and its opposite. ”38 Not only is the mȝʿ-ḫrw candidate morally sound—a point

emphasized by Reinhard Grieshammer39—

but everything is ritually correct as well, the

expression indicating that he is “cleared” to

proceed to the next step, that everything is in

proper order and the solemnities may go on.

Mȝʿ-ḫrw represents the initial, not the final, clearance, for the candidate was already

mȝʿ-ḫrw from the time he entered the temple.

Purification: The Preface to All

Important Rites

Lines 9–10: “Thou art pure, thy heart is pure”

The whole section following (lines 9–19)

has to do with pronouncing the candidate

clean. Among the Egyptians, “all religious

ceremonies of Pharaonic times … were

prefaced by some act of ritual cleansing.” 40

The order of the universe itself remains

secure only while and because the beneficent

power of Osiris remains sacred and

uncontaminated, rendering “the life of all

things pure and undefiled. ”41 First, in all major rites, according to Gustave Jéquier,

came “a solemn lustration performed on the

officiant himself by two priests” (see p. 145,

fig. 37; p. 445, fig. 143). 42 The officiant must be washed before he can officiate. The daily

temple cult began with purification: “Before

entering the temple the priest had to purify

himself in the sacred pool,” 43 and “the lustration which the king underwent before

officiating as high-priest … was of a similar

kind.” 44 Though the Egyptians were very health conscious and fanatically clean45—

and the Osirian cult especially had an

obsession with pollution,46 the funerary texts

being full of prescriptions for avoiding physical filth and contamination of every

kind—they were no less concerned with

moral cleanliness: “God loves purity more

than millions of offerings, more than

hundreds of thousands of electrum [fine

gold]; … his heart is satisfied with [or

delights ( ḥtp) in] great purity. ”47 “According to the Book of Breathings, ” wrote Aylward Blackman, “the Osirian dead, before entering

the Hall of the Two Rights, were purified …

‘ cleansed from all evil, every

abomination.’” 48 He is “pure from head to foot” (fig. 33). 49

Figure 33. In being baptized (indicated by the waters pouring over him), the subject also receives the breath of life ( snsn), symbolized by a sail filled with wind. P.

Wesay, Khary, ca. 1250 B.C. BM 9949 © Copyright

The British Museum.

The purification rite, preceding all

important ceremonies, is initiatory in nature,

preparing one for another phase of existence

or for some special office or calling; 50 it takes place not in the temple proper but in

the wʿb.t, or “purification room” —a sort of annex. 51

Every Egyptian priest, before entering the temple or undertaking to officiate, had to “go

down ( hȝ ỉ)” into a “sea” or “lake,” as did the priests in the temple at Jerusalem. Even

the great Thutmosis III had to “bathe in the

lake (or pool) of wʿb ( or pure lake)” before visiting the temple at Karnak. 52 Siegfried Schott traces the custom back to the

coronation rites, during which the king had to

visit the temple in ritual attire, purifying

himself beforehand. 53 Coronation reliefs regularly begin with a purification scene. 54

The key word wʿb occurs no less than

eight times in this section of the Book of

Breathings. According to Jéquier, the

formula “I am wʿb” really means that one is baptized and means it in every sense of the

word, including that of being qualified by

baptism “to participate in the divine life.” 55

He points out elsewhere that the translation

“purification” fails to express the idea that

this is “a veritable sacrament by which a

person ( l’intéressé) obtained rebirth, eternal

life, … in reality a baptism by water. ”56

Gardiner compared it to Christian baptism

since in it “a symbolic cleansing by means of

water serves as initiation into a properly

legitimated religious life. ”57 According to Jéquier, the living as well as the dead

become nfr, “renewed,” through the

ordinances of wʿb—“immersion in the

waters of the abyss.” 58

Waters of Passage; the Sun Rising

from the Waters

As usual in Egyptian rites, cosmic

associations lie ready to hand. “It is a

typically Egyptian practice,” wrote

Alexandre Piankoff, “to give several

different symbolic formulations to one and

the same event, ”59 and no rites offer a richer variety of profound associations than those

dealing with water. For not only is water a

symbol of cleansing, cooling, refreshing, and

reviving, but it actually does all those things at one and the same time, along with which it

is, par excellence, the medium of passage;

halfway between solid matter and tenuous

spirit, it enables bodies to move from one

place to another in a state of effortless

motion and silent suspension, visibly

hovering between the solid earth below and

the empty sky above. Papyrus Louvre N.

3292 is introduced by a vignette showing the

purifications before Re-Horakhty which take

place at the passing of the horizon.60 The passing of the horizon is itself an act of

purification, a sloughing off of the impurities

of a former life so that one may enter a new

world in a state of perfect purity.61 Hence the wʿb.t, or purification room, is an essential part of every structure of cosmic

significance. 62 The first hour of the Stundenwache is devoted to purifications

accompanied by hymns of jubilation hailing

the entrance of the god into his newly purified house, a typical New Year’s motif

that Friedrich von Bissing relates to the sed-

festival63 and that strongly suggests the Jewish Hanukkah.64 In such initiatory situations, “heaven and earth unite ( smȝ)” in effusive purification ceremonies. 65

For the archetype of the one who passes

through the waters is the sun, emerging daily

from the waters of the underworld, fresh and

reborn at dawn.66 “The conception,” wrote Jéquier, “is the same as that of the Christian

baptism,” except that with the Egyptians “the

passage through the water is a necessity and

not a mere symbol.” 67 In the Pyramid Texts the Heliopolitan king bathes in the solar pool

of the temple and so is reborn in the watery

embrace of Osiris. 68 It is in the waters that the solar and chthonian elements meet and

blend since the sun, upon leaving the

underworld, must rise from the waters “of

the eastern pool of the temple of Heliopolis”

after passing through those waters: “The old

Heliopolitan belief in the rebirth of the dead

through washing, … not … being revivified,

but … being reborn with a new and

mysterious body” is already apparent in the

document in which King Snefru (the father of

Cheops who built the Great Pyramid),

through an ordinance of washing, becomes

“identified with Osiris, and yet appears

emerging like the sun-god, reborn, of course,

from the horizon.” 69

In theory, at least, every day the king of

Egypt would arise and bathe at dawn,

emerging from the waters of his ablutions at

the very same moment that his father, the sun,

arose from the waters of the eastern pool of

Heliopolis; in the Pyramid Texts this rite

appears as a symbol of resurrection and, as

such, belongs to the funerary rites, in which

it is represented by the washing of the

dead. 70 In this ceremonial bath—whether of the living or the dead, as so often appears in

the cultic activities of the Egyptians—the

coronation rites, the daily rites performed by

the king (or priests representing him), and

the burial ceremonials all come together.71

Jaroslav Černý notes that “the ceremony of

purification undergone by the living king was

also performed on the body of the dead

king.” 72 Hence Blackman can maintain that

“the Solar-Pharaonic toilet” is nothing less

than “the basis of all the other main Egyptian

religious rites, namely the preparation of the

body for burial, the funerary liturgy, the

temple-liturgy, and the purification of the

Pharaoh in the temple-vestry.” 73 It is no less fundamental to the greatest of all rites of

passage—the coronation.74 The formal washing of the king in the first hour of the

Stundenwache was performed by Thoth and

Anubis in the presence of all the gods; as he

pours from the nms.t-jug, the priest says, “I am Thoth … who repelled evil in the water.

The king is endowed with life—thou art

pure. … Cool water libations to revive

Osiris. … The fluid that came from thee, I

bring to thee!” —the idea being that the

washing restores life to the body by returning

its vital moisture to it.75 It is at the winter solstice of the new year that the owner of the

Sensaos Book of Breathings prays to share

the honors of Atum, the Great Ancient One,

when the waters are purified for him in the

House of the Prince (or of Thoth) in

Heliopolis. 76 In another Breathings text, the purification is described as a “pouring” of

glory over a person,77 in the manner in which Homeric heroes are transformed in the

shower bath ( asaminthos).78

Waters of Life

If the same rite could appear in different

contexts, it is found no less at different levels. Thus Jéquier notes that the baptism

by which the Egyptian “becomes regenerate

like a god … is simply the image of the real

baptism, which can only be acquired by

death … and must be renewed before every

ceremony. ”79 The formal baptism with the four jars and the daily washings in the

temple thus had the same symbolism and the

same purpose—to prepare one to become a

god by entering into a divine condition: the

word nṯry occurs often in our snsn papyrus and means to deify or sanctify, but at the

same time, according to Morenz, it also

means “to purify,” that being in fact its main

sense. 80 Ernst Andersson-Akmar has demonstrated that the standard and

primordial Egyptian glyph for divinity, the

flag or nṯr symbol, possibly “represents

purity; he who is pure.” 81 “He who is pure ( wʿb),” writes Wilhelm Czermak, “can be a

servant of the gods, … with the power to exalt, … and be an assistant to the creator

himself.” He sees the hidden things of the

exalted land which rose out of the waters.82

As Horus and Thoth baptize the subject of

Papyrus Herweben, they recite: “She is pure,

she is pure! [She is pure] with purity ( or

purification) of Horus. Horus is pure, she is

pure, her purification is the purification of

Seth. Seth is pure, she is pure; she is pure,

Thoth is pure! Thoth is pure, she is pure!”

Here the recipient is ecstatically endowed

with the status of her divine ministrants. 83

The concept is very old, as we read of a

monarch of the Old Kingdom: “O Pepi, stand

up! Thou art baptized ( wʿb), thy ka is baptized, Horus has immersed ( sʿb) thee in the Qbḥw; thy baptism is the baptism of Shu,

… the baptism of Tefnut.” 84 “Pepi is baptized with the same baptism which Horus

administered to his eye.” 85 As these words

indicate, the baptism was not a dumb show, a pantomime: the word wʿb “signifies not only

‘to purify,’ but also ‘to give religious or

moral instruction, to teach the truth.’” 86

The qbḥw here mentioned is the vitalizing

principle87 of Nun, the primordial waters from which the earth itself emerged and

which therefore are preearthly, eternal

cosmic waters.88 The dead must be purified,

“washed ( ỉʿy.t)” in heaven; passing the

horizon, he must wash ( sty) to become pure ( wʿb).89 An inscription describes the temple of Hathor at Philae as “resembling the

celestial ocean, which bears the disk which

rises and sets in it every day.” 90 We are told that the temple pool at Edfu “came into

existence at the Beginning.” 91 The dead

“bathes in the pool of Qbḥw.” 92 In theory, every tomb had its waters of Nun, 93 which adorn the cenotaph of Seti I and are labeled

simply with the heaven glyph . 94 It is not too much to say that purification rites also

effect a symbolic rebirth, sanctification or

divinization, and enlightenment, with water,

light, and air cleansing and giving life at the

same time.95

Figure 34. Within the tent of purification, the god Anubis anoints a large fish wrapped in mummy bands placed on a lion couch between the four sons of

Horus. Tomb of Khabekhnet, western Thebes, ca.

1250 B.C.

Waters of Cleansing

Line 10: “thy front with washing, thy back with cleansing water, thine inward parts with

soda and natron”

In chapter 125 of the Book of the Dead,

we read: “I am pure! My front is pure, my

back is pure! My middle is a place of

Maat” ;96 and in the fourteenth hour of the Stundenwache Horus says to Osiris: “Thy

front is pure, thy back is pure with … cool

water from the ocean. … The gods embrace

thee and unite ( snsn) themselves to thee, so that their name becomes Snsnty, ” 97 where relationship with the snsn motif is obvious.

The great purifying agent is, of course,

water.98 The entire sojourn of the dead in the embalming house ( wʿb.t) was regarded as a

water purification, during which the subject

was referred to as a fish in its watery

element (fig. 34). 99 It was in the tent of purification that the dead received his daily

lustral bath at the moment of sunrise, just as

the living king did in such a tent;100 at that

time the body was completely drenched with water “to permit its spirit to set forth in the

celestial regions,” 101 the water running back into the Nile while the candidate moved on

to heavenly realms. 102 In the Pyramid Texts, the subject (the king) is told to

decontaminate himself “in the qbḥw-pitcher of the stars” as he leaves the earth to enter

heaven, the qbḥw being the celestial waters that, among other things, purge one of all

earthly defilement. 103 In the royal baptism, the dead person, god, or priest-king is

drenched with water from two ḥs-vases, the vessels normally used in baptism. 104 These were tall, thin vases easy to lift and pour

from without spilling. Four nms.t-jars, as described in Pyramid Text 510 §1140a, held

purification water, and in Pyramid Text 536

§1293b–d, they come forth from the “palazzo

divino,” or royal washroom, according to

Claudia Dolzani.105 In the later period, as is

well known, holy water was dispensed at the

doors of Egyptian temples by means of coin-

operated machines (fig. 35).106

Figure 35. Heron of Alexandria, ca. 100 B.C.,

described a modern convenience in which the

worshipper dropped a five-drachma coin into a bronze container; the coin struck a lever and opened the

spigot, dispensing the holy water. 1851 reconstruction.

Washing and Clothing

In Pyramid Text 471 §§920–31, “The

attendants of Horus purify NN, they bathe

him, they dry him off, they instruct him in the

formulas of the right way (the correct

ordinances), … how to mount up. NN then mounts up to the sky.” 107 It is the washing away of old dirt. “If a man sees himself in a

dream plunging in the river,” says an

Egyptian dream book, “good; it means

absolution from all ills.” 108 The Osirian doctrine was much concerned with keeping

the earth and especially the water free from

pollution. 109 In the Book of the Dead, “the deceased not only drinks the water; he is

washed in it. … ‘I have washed myself in the

water wherein the god Ra washeth himself

when he leaveth the eastern part of the sky.’

This washing of the deceased was a

ceremony of purification, but clearly it is

also one of identification, as, incidentally, is

the baptism of Paul and subsequent

Christianity in contrast to that of Judaism. …

The washing of the corpse, however, not

only was an important ritual for the ancient

Egyptians, but is still important … for the

modern Jew. ”110 At Delphi the initiate was bathed in and drank of the water of Lethe to

wash away all memory of his past; later in

the ceremony he was required to drink the

water of memory so that he would remember

all he heard and saw of the ordinances. 111

Figure 36. The ram’s head wearing the atef-crown of Osiris sits atop the vase, whose spout is the maat-feather of truth guarded by the royal sphinx, a rebus writing of nb mȝʿ.t “lord of truth.” The ark is carried by eight ritually pure priests. Tomb of Imiseba, ca.

1120 B.C.

But water does more than purify—it gives

life, literally, to all organisms; the water of

life is a worldwide concept. 112 “The ramifications of the subject are enormous,”

Gardiner observes.113 There is no mistaking the meaning of the little ankh (life) symbols which pour from the sacred vases in

Egyptian baptismal scenes such as in the

temple of Ramses II at Karnak, which shows

the king being baptized with ankh and was (divine power) symbols as he enters the

temple and which bears the inscription,

“Water for his father, that life might be given

to him.” 114 Blackman makes a distinction between the water rite by which the king is

reborn and that by which he is merely

refreshed and cleansed. 115

One form of baptismal vase is crowned

with a ram’s head and was designated for

purification at the time of the New Year, the

solar significance of which, as well as its

relationship to a new life, is well known

(fig. 36). 116 It is interesting that Brigham

Young, in his New Year’s proclamation for the year of 1852 as governor of Utah

Territory, suggested some sort of ablution for

the occasion: “And I recommend … that they

rise early in the morning of the first day of

the New Year, and wash their bodies with

pure water,” thus beginning a new phase of

life with a new resolve. 117

One aspect of Christian baptism which has

been quite overlooked is its constant

association with the dead. The main calling

of the Baptist was to fulfill promises made

once to those now dead (Luke 1:72–79), to

bring light and hope to those sitting in

darkness (Luke 1:79), to have mercy on the

fathers who have gone before (Luke 1:54–

55, 72), and “to turn the hearts of the [dead]

fathers to the children” (Luke 1:17).

Purification, rather than being an end in

itself, always prepares the way for things to

follow, being part of a larger sequence of

ordinances. It must precede each of the five basic Egyptian ceremonies: “All five rites,

viz. ; the daily temple liturgy, the ceremonial toilet in the House of the Morning, the

preparation of the dead king’s body for

burial, the daily funerary liturgy, and the

Opening of the Mouth,” “closely resemble

one another in their main features” —namely,

washing, natron, robing, anointing, insignia,

and perhaps a meal. 118 Moreover, as Moret has noted, the related rites of washing,

anointing, and clothing are the same for the

daily temple cult as for the dead, 119 which is not surprising since they are the normal

business of every matutinal rising. The

preparation and revival of the dead are

described as the levee of a great lord

preparing for the business of the day as he

arises, bathes, is clothed in apotropaic garb,

breakfasts, and goes forth amid morning

salutations (see p. 100, fig. 22). 120 In

Pyramid Text 518 §§1195–98, we find the candidate inaugurating the New Year by

“going down with the gods into the cool

waters,” after which he finds them “standing

clad (wrapped) in their garments with white

sandals upon their feet.” In homage to the

king—or, rather, in taking their New Year

oath to him—“they cast off their white

sandals and remove ( or change, shift

around)121 their garments. ”122 This strongly suggests the ancient Israelite rite of “treading

upon the garments,” described in Alma

46:21–22, as well as by Jonathan Smith. 123

In Christian Egypt the candidate received

“the washing of grace and the indestructible

garment,” 124 but it was especially the related sect of the Mandaeans whose cultic life

centered around the association of baptism

and garment. Ethel Drower relates the

manda, or reed hut by the riverside in which ritual washings were performed, with the

prehistoric Egyptian House of the Morning in which Pharaoh was baptized. 125 Blackman designates the House of the Morning, where

the king was washed at every dawn before

entering the temple of Heliopolis, as “the

temple-vestry” or clothing-room; 126 “when the lustration was completed,” he explains,

His Majesty “was attired in one or more

garments,” preparatory to officiating in the

ordinances of the house. 127 With the bath, Pharaoh receives a special “garment”

represented by a purified amulet “for the

new day. ”128 Following his anointing, the subject is arrayed in the white nemes-cloth and insignia and goes forth like a prince. 129

Figure 37. As Horus and Thoth pour life-symbols as water over the pharaoh, each declares him to be

“very pure”; “thy purity is my purity!” Temple of

Amenhotep II at Amada, Nubia, ca. 1420 B.C. As

reproduced in Lepsius, Denkmäler, 5. 3:65d. Courtesy of New York Public Library.

Use of Natron and Incense

Line 10: “thine inward parts with soda ( bd.t) and natron ( ḥsmn)”

There are other substances besides water

that cleanse and hence sanctify, and they too

are essential to the ritual purifications: “I am

pure, cleansed, censed with ḥsmn, … with

snṯr, … with sweet fragrance that comes from the Horus eye.” 130 In the El-Bersheh tomb, the owner, Djeḥutiḥotep, is washed by

his sons, who hold vessels labeled bd, or natron, and balls of “some kind of natron,

such as ḥosmen or niṯer” (see p. 147, fig.

39).131 A study by Dolzani identifies bd as a product of Nekhbet in Upper Egypt,

symbolic of the saliva of Seth, and renders

the verb bd as meaning “to purify with bd-

soda.” 132 The chemist Alfred Lucas identifies natron as natural soda, “a

compound of sodium carbonate and sodium

bicarbonate, mixed with varying proportions

of sodium sulphate and common salt. ”133

Louis Speleers maintains that bd, ḥsmn, smn,

and nṯr were synonymous, 134 while Robert Steuer holds that bd and ḥsmn are special mixtures of natron ( nṯr). 135 Junker notes that bd and ḥsmn, often mentioned together, are

types of natron, 136 with snṯr sometimes appearing in the place of bd. 137 But while bd is called “the saliva of Seth,” ḥsmn is the saliva of Horus;138 both are soda, Dolzani concludes, but coming from different

deposits and therefore being of somewhat

different composition. The word ḥsmn, she claims, is a variant of smn, 139 and both are nṯr, which properly means “divine” ;140 hence the verb ḥsmn, meaning “to purify with

soda,” is a synonym of the verb nṯry, “to make or be divine.” 141 She sees a typical Egyptian play on words between nṯr(j),

meaning “god, divine,” and nṯr(j), meaning

“purification” and designating “the funeral

rite which makes the dead king a god.” She

also finds nṯr, “incense,” interchangeable with snṯr, the commonest Egyptian word for incense, which is also a verb meaning “to

make divine.” 142 The play on words goes

back as far as Pyramid Text 423 §765b:

“Take thy natron ( nṯry=k), that thou mayest become divine ( nṯr=k),” according to

Morenz. 143 The substance was mixed with the water poured from the four sacred nms.t-

jars in washing the dead and in baptizing the

king (fig. 37; cf. p. 445, fig. 143), who at the

same time was fanned by the breath-giving

wings of Isis. 144 That ḥsmn is more than a mere cosmetic or symbol of purity is

strikingly shown in vignettes to the

seventeenth chapter of the Book of the Dead,

in which the physical aspects of the

resurrection are graphically set forth and in

which the embryonic stirrings of life are

shown taking place in what is designated as

the “pool of ḥsmn” (fig. 38). 145

Figure 38. Here the stirrings of life begin in what is labeled the “pool of ḥsmn” and the temple pool of Herakleopolis. The figure presiding is, fittingly, both male and female and is the Great Green One,

meaning the ocean. P. Ani, BD 17, ca. 1250 B.C. BM

10470 © Copyright The British Museum.

This brings us to the snsn situation, in

which the scenting of the air is important:

“The incense and its smoke became for the

dead the element of his respiration,” as we

read in Pyramid Text 463 §877a: “This air

that you breathe is incense, and thy wind of

the north is the smoke of incense. ”146

Certainly, incense and libations regularly go

together, 147 and the opening of the Breathings Papyrus Louvre N. 3292 shows purification

by water and incense being carried out

together. 148 Since the incense represents “the exudations … of Osiris,” the censing of the

body has the same effect as the ritual libation

in “restoring to it its lost moisture,” by

transfusion, 149 chasing away the evil demons of dessication. 150 Smoke, like water, has certain obvious, more-than-symbolic

functions: as fumigation, it repels evil

insects and demons and thus protects mortals

and immortals alike. 151 In the Neferhotep inscription, the censing of the god signifies

the driving away of his enemies from the

sacred bark so that it can proceed over the

waters. 152 Wherever the living pharaoh went, censing preceded him; evil influences

were banished by the censing of conquered

cities. Also, the same natron and incense

substances were used in temples as at

funerals. 153 On the positive side, the “odor of sanctity” attracted good spirits as

effectively as it repelled bad ones—a

special sign of the presence of the divine was, as in the Christian traditions, a

sweetness in the air.154 Purification by burning incense as a form of fumigation155

was natural in a land where sanitary

disposal was not well provided and the air

of human habitations and communities

needed sweetening. Plutarch reports that in a

land of swamps, where the air was heavy by

night and day with marsh gases and other

miasmic vapors, health, happiness, and

holiness were all dependent on the

sweetness of the air, which was achieved by

the wholesale ritual burning of aromatic

herbs and woods.156 To decontaminate himself from air pollution, the Egyptian

censed himself three times a day.157

“Dwellings, clothes, and people were

perfumed with smoke as in modern Egypt; …

incense was powdered, mixed with honey

into balls and chewed, especially by the

ladies. ”158 Though the use of soda preceded that of incense in Egypt, according to

Dolzani, their use and significance were the

same—whether as smoke or as liquid, they

both purified and sweetened. 159 Types of incense are listed in Papyrus Salt 825: snṯr

(the pitch of a terebinth, or turpentine tree),

ʿnty (oliban or frankincense of Arabia); sfy-

pitch, tỉšps, and šdḥ (a liquid). 160

The restorative powers of incense provide

an interesting link between the spirit and

body in the rites of Unas, where the smoke of

scented candles provides the first visible

embodiment of the royal ba. 161 The rite of imbuing the king with life by pouring water

over him was accompanied by the burning of

incense, and in the Pyramid Texts, incense

“washes” and “adorns” the dead just as

water does.162 Originally, the purpose of censing, according to Hans Bonnet, was “to

supply one with the vital power of the

aroma, fragrance of divinity,” but later “it served to lead one into the circle of the gods

and their heavenly kingdom.” 163 While Alfred Wiedemann held that censing began in

the temples and was later taken over by the

funeral rites, 164 Eberhard Otto maintains the opposite, that censing was borrowed by the

temples from the royal funeral rites.165

Bonnet thought that the use of incense in the

Osiris rites was secondary. 166 In any case, it seems less indispensable than the primal use

of water. The purposes of the Second Book

of Breathings are, according to Jean-Claude

Goyon, to provide the dead externally with

(1) “alimentary offerings (bread of Geb),”

(2) “lustrations which guarantee health and

perpetual youth (Nile-water), … and, above

all,” (3) “the breath of life, thanks to the

fumigation with perfumed substances.” 167

Figure 39. The Two Ladies as Maat supplying oil,

water, and incense balls to a winged divine head

wearing the atef- crown and a crescent moon. From a lintel near the pyramids of Begrawiya near Meroe,

Nubia. Redrawn and restored from Lepsius,

Denkmäler, 5. 3:34b. Courtesy of New York Public Library.

Soda being the Egyptian equivalent for

soap,168 natron put into the water enhanced the efficacy of ritual washings.169 Used as a mouthwash or chewed as natron balls (fig.

39), its refreshing and restorative qualities

gave the sensation of having “the mouth of a

newborn calf” 170 or an innocent babe, “fit to pronounce the formulae” ;171 it gave Pharaoh not only a clean mouth but a new mouth. 172 In the end, all purifying substances and offices

belong together: “By being washed or

sprinkled … and fumigated with incense, and by the chewing of natron, the king was

mysteriously reborn, brought into contact

with divinities. ”173 If censing seems to be a secondary operation, the ancients themselves

had reason to limit its use on occasions

where clear heads were required since the

inhaling of the stuff, even in mild doses, can

have a narcotic effect. In the same way,

music can be a distraction rather than an aid

in ordinances requiring a measure of

concentration and memory. 174

Anointing

But the washing and censing is only half

the picture. To be effective, it had to be

followed by anointing: A man “should be

anointed with oil and unguent, the censer

being in his hand with incense. Natron must

be behind his ears, bd- natron must be in his mouth, dressed in two new garments, having

washed himself in inundation water, shod in white sandals” —all this by way of

achieving the purity necessary to read the

particularly holy book of the Divine Cow. 175

Likewise, before reciting the Book of the

Two Ways, a companion piece to the Book of

Breathings, a man “must anoint himself and

bathe in water of the Inundation, put on new

garments and white leather slippers,” for that

is what Thoth the scribe does, and “the

servants of men shall do exactly as he

does.” 176 In the pyramid rites, King Unas, after passing through the waters to unite

spirit and body, receives an anointing and a

garment. 177 The same basic combination marks the coronation of the Hittite king,

“solemnized by a ceremony which included

anointing with oil, clothing in special

garments, coronation, and bestowal of a

royal name.” 178

Whereas incense and natron, as has been

noted, were in all probability later additions to the water purifications, the anointing with

oil was as old as the latter and regularly

accompanied them. If the fundamental idea is

renewal and rebirth, with the initiate being

treated as a newborn babe, then the

inevitable routine is first washing, then

anointing, then wrapping, and then feeding

with honey to help the babe take the milk of

the breast. This is the order of things

followed in the Egyptian coronation, as well

as the funeral, and it is also the sequence

followed in the Book of Breathings. “The

anointing with holy oil was necessary also to

sanctify ( sacrer) the god or the dead who

had been clothed … with royal and divine

garments and insignia.” The oil “bestowed

vigor and endurance on one’s body.” 179

Svein Bjerke notes that while washing

prepared one to receive an office, the

authority of the same was bestowed by

anointing: purifications “are only creating the capacity to hold office[; ] the anointing,

on the other hand, is part of the ritual which

installs the object in his office. ”180 Even the divinity of a god, as Edouard Naville puts it,

depends “on his being anointed with holy oil

which may never be missing from his

brow.” 181 “The rite of anointing,” S.

Mayassis observes, “is the most sacred

moment of all the royal ceremonies. ”182 The reliefs in the temple of Seti I often depict the

ritual sequence of washing, anointing, and

clothing (see color plates 8–9). The oil

“revives, preserves, and protects.” 183 In the temple of Ramses II at Karnak is a scene

showing the king giving water and incense to

Amon with the declaration, “I give [to thee]

all life and all health”; in the following

scene he is offering a model sphinx, while

between him and the god stand four jars of

oil. 184 In panel eighteen, the inscription

reports that we behold “Amon-Re, the primal water. … He giveth all life and all

health,” while Amon himself says, “I give …

life, endurance, well-being” (the symbols for

these are the ankh, the djed, and the was-

scepters);185 in the next panel we see Khnum the creator “making ointment,” according to

the inscription, “that life may be bestowed.

He gives all life and health,” while the god

himself says, “I give to thee the kingship of

Atum.” 186 Thus, while the portrayal of the bestowing of ointment is often accompanied

by inscriptions that leave us in no doubt that

it represents an anointing, the actual act of

anointing itself, unlike that of baptism, is

never depicted. Our Book of Breathings may

conceal an anointing rite in the peculiar

writing of wʿb in line 10, with a horn. The regular form of wʿb is used except after ḥȝ.t, which everyone translates as “front,” though

its primary meaning is “forehead. ”187 The

proper oil of anointing is ḥȝt.t, Stirnöl, the oil that is placed first on the brow.188 Since the Wörterbuch gives no horn hieroglyph

under wʿb, 189 this may be a horn of anointing.

Pyramid Text 418 §742 reads, “Hail to thee,

O fine oil. … I place thee upon the head

(crown of the head) of my father NN as

Horus placed thee on the crown of the head

of his father Osiris. ”190 “Anointing and investiture constitute important episodes of

all rituals,” writes Philippe Derchain, “but

especially at the investiture of a king or god

in the capacity of sovereign.” 191 In Egypt, the priest who actually crowned the king, called

the Inmutef, bore the title of Greatest of Anointers.192 When Akhenaton abolished all rites in which the human bodily form

appeared, the one thing he preserved was the

symbolic anointing: “the officiant, standing

beneath the open sky, held up the unguent …

to the solar disk itself.” 193

The Books of Breathings, concerned with the quality as well as the quantity of air,

make much of sweet smells in both their

restorative and ritual capacities. If water

refreshes and revives and heals, so does

sweet ointment; the oil no less than the water

is a symbol and agent of resurrection. In very

ancient times, Ptah, Horus, Seth, and Thoth

all enjoyed the epithet of ḥry bȝq=f n ʿnḫ,

“he who possesses the life-giving olive-

tree,” or as Konrad Hoffmann renders it, “N

besitzt Leben,” “der unter seinem

Ölbaum.” 194 In the archaic Ramesseum rites, at a feast where all partook of the life-giving

eye of Horus as food, the people were

anointed on the brow with ḥȝt.t oil ( Stirnöl), which represented the eye. 195 At the anointing of the eyes, the initiate was told:

“Geb, who was the head of the firstborn of

the Great Company of the Gods, has attached

thy head to thy bones.” “He has brought

together thy flesh. … Thy mother giveth thee birth on this day. She maketh thy two eyes to

be in thee, thy two arms are made for thee.

… Geb has attached thy head for thee,”

etc. 196 So in Breathings text Leiden T 32:

“To thee is given ointment on the two arms of

Šsmw (the “Anointer”) beside Neith in the

House of Mnnw (asphalt?).” 197 This reconstituting of the dead body takes one to

the old Judeo-Christian tradition of the oil of

healing “to revive the body of Adam and

with him to revive the bodies of the dead. …

And the oil of mercy shall be for generation

to generation for those who are ready to be

born again of water and the Holy Spirit.” 198

Only when the Son of God is baptized in the

Jordan “shall thy father Adam receive of this

oil of mercy,” which will restore him and his

children to life,199 in all of which the baptism and the anointing go together. The

words of Ignatius on the anointing of Christ

(the Messiah, the Anointed One) might have been taken from a Book of Breathings: “The

Lord received myrrh on his head that he

might breathe immortality into the

Church.” 200

Line 11: “No member of thine causeth offense ( or is offensive; nn ʿt ỉm=k m ỉsf.t)”

Isf.t is evildoing in every sense. 201 This simply confirms what has already been said,

consistent with the idea, expressed in the

Opening of the Mouth ceremony, 202 of various members of the body as quasi-independent and responsible entities; the

idea is familiar from the scriptures,

specifically in Matthew 5:29–30 and

1 Corinthians 12:14–26.

Figure 40. In three different ways of expressing the same ideas, the wedjat-eye, representing the complete physical body, is seen in embryo or

tadpolelike stage, while the two pools of life-making waters are conspicuous. In the first example, the sun appears through the open doors of the temple, while Re-Horakhty, he “of the horizon,” holds up the symbol of life. In the second, the sun is missing, the doors are shut, and instead of Re-Horakhty we see only the

horizon-symbol under the door. In the third, the doors are open, but instead of the sun we see the dead man himself, following the way of the god in resurrection.

(A) TCD MS 1661/2 by permission of Board of

Trinity College Dublin. (B) National Museum of

Antiquities, Leiden. (C) P. Hunefer, ca. 1310 B.C.

BM 9901 © Copyright The British Museum.

Moral Cleanliness

Line 12: “(cleansed, purified) … in the standing waters of the Meadows of Rest”

The classic rite de passage is a passing

through the waters. The morning toilet of the

king was more than a purification; it was a

passing through the waters: “It is clear that

this water which the dead must cross is also

the water in which they are purified and in

which Re bathes before each sunrise. ”203

The idea of passing through waters of

cleansing and renewal, even as the sun

passes through the waters of Nun to emerge

to a new life, “simply saturated the official

and popular cult, from its beginning to its full

development” (fig. 40; cf. p. 145, fig. 38).204

By passing through the water, the dead king

was thought to be regenerated “and also at

the same time to be affiliated to the sun-god,

through the medium of the sacred water, …

identified not only with Nun, the primeval

ocean, but also with the seed of the sun-

god.” 205 Following the king’s example, every dead person, before his funeral, is about to

cross a lake.206 “You purify yourself on the horizon, leaving all unclean things behind

you in the lakes of Shu,” says Pyramid Text

222 §208,207 illustrating the identity of lustral waters, heavenly journey, and temple

pool. Considerable confusion has resulted

from the Egyptian practice of giving a

variety of names to one and the same sacred

lake or temple pool, as Hartwig Altenmüller

has noted;208 at the same time, identical rites could take place at a number of pools, which

might accordingly be taken for only one.209

Moreover, a variety of rites could all

symbolize the same thing and thus be

identified with each other. Thus the passage

from earth to heaven was a water journey by

ship210 or reed rafts; 211 or it was a bath, 212 a washing, or a libation. The waters of

passage are variously designated as the lakes

of the duat, 213 the qbḥw (celestial ocean),214

the horizon, the “sacred lake” 215 in the wʿb.t or “pure place,” the Nile, Nun (the

primordial ocean), 216 the “Winding Watercourse” 217 ( š n ḫȝ), 218 the waters of birth, the voyage being the birth passage,219

etc. The passage in chapter 17 of the Book of

the Dead that says, “The expelling of

whatever sin is upon me. I have purified

myself in the two pools of Heracleopolis,” is

explained by some Egyptian scribes as

referring “to the day of my birth,” by others

as “the day of offerings to the great god who

is there, brought by the human race,” and by

still others as the two great world oceans. 220

Pool and Meadow

The otherworldly waters are dark and

dangerous, and the four main ways in which the Egyptian passes ritually through them are

(1) by baptism, (2) by drowning, (3) by

swimming, and (4) by boat, all ritually

related. 221 Baptism may be taken to include bathing, drenching, foot washing, hand

washing, or face washing since “no

distinction is made between the different

ordinances of purification ( die

verschiedenen Reinigungshandlungen sind

nicht geschieden).” 222 Thus an elaborate lustration could be supplanted by a mere

libation without losing any of its solar or

funerary significance. 223 The ideas that “the dead are in primeval waters from which they

can be reborn like the sun” 224 and that the dead hoped by passing through the waters of

Nun to put off the old life and put on a new

one in the manner of the nocturnal sun on his

journey225 are certainly akin to Jewish and Christian concepts; even the solar

significance is not missing in the latter, for, as is well known, early Christian baptism

took place at sunrise and in some regions

could be performed only at Easter. In Egypt

in the later period, “to the waters of the

ocean, identified with Osiris, were

transferred all those regenerative properties

which were originally ascribed to the waters

of Nun, the primeval ocean.” 226 In short, the lustration water “was identified with that of

Nun, or of a pool sacred to the sun-god,” the

waters from which Pharaoh was born. 227 In the Second Book of Breathings, “the virtue

of this water, which perpetually renewed

itself and possessed a magical power of

regeneration, is supreme. It guarantees

eternal life”; it is the water of the Nile, of

Nun of the primordial ocean. 228

Drowning— or, properly, “apotheosis by

drowning” —is a much-studied theme among

Egyptologists.229 Ramses II reports that his

father, Seti I, was ritually drowned, either literally or in effigy.230 In the Shabako text of the Memphite theology, Osiris is drowned

and spends three days in the waters of the

Nile, from which he emerges resurrected to

“follow in the footsteps of him who shines

on the horizon, upon the ways of Re on the

Great Throne. ”231 A parallel to this is the drowning of the Apis-bull at Memphis in the

body of water called the qbḥw, representing the primeval heavenly waters. 232 It is very probable, Jéquier finds, that the temple lakes

were for drowning sacrificial bulls, whose

souls would join with Re in the manner of

Osiris, the archetypal sacrifice. 233

Swimming is a rather surprising variation

of the theme, suggested by the “Natatorium”

at Abydos and in Hadrian’s villa. 234 Pharaoh makes ritual swims on occasion, which

appear as dangerous undertakings, as he

passes through the lake, river, or ocean “on

the night of great fear.” 235 His way is led by the Heavenly Cow—“she who swims

through the lake,” Nm.t š. 236 “On his journey to heaven the dead [king] has to pass a

dangerous pond” ;237 he must escape the Archerousian lake, the “spiritual power

( Geistermacht)” of the “great lake,”

represented by the fearful embrace and

confinement of the coffin. 238 The Archerousian lake is important in the early

Jewish and Christian views of the

hereafter.239

Way of Passing through the Waters

Navigation is, of course, the safest and

most convenient way to pass through the

waters (see p. 223, fig. 66). The voyage of

the sun-god and morning star to their point of

rising was the “sailing … upon the Nun,” the

heavenly ocean. 240 In the Pyramid Texts, as in the Book of Breathings (lines 98–99), the

coffin is treated as a boat, towed by ropes through the waters of the cosmic sea, which

is represented by drenching the coffin with

water as it is pulled through narrow

passages from one chamber or world to

another.241 The “Imperishables” and the

“unwearied Stars” are the crews that tow the

dead “through the waters with their solid

cables.” 242 The well-known ferry to the other world is not missing, 243 and the pyramid complexes include landing places

where real and very ancient boats have been

found moored (fig. 41).244 Indeed, one of the commonest Egyptian expressions for dying is

mnỉ, meaning to moor a ship or arrive at a landing place. Royalty did sail on

ceremonial lakes in sacred barks, 245 and the

“Lake of Life” that furnishes the water of

purification is the same water on which the

ceremonial bark of Amon at Thebes, the

“Sokar-bark,” navigated at the New Year;246

it is the “pool of Khonsu” which figures so prominently in our Book of Breathings. The

sun-god “uses several barks” to negotiate the

underworld, according to Hornung, to match

the variety of forms he takes during the

journey, 247 but for all that there is only one solar ship, though it may change its name

along the way;248 it is the ship itself that makes the changes ( ḫpr.w) so that the

passengers need never transfer from boat to

boat.249 The passage of the sun-god by boat through the underworld matches the royal

progress of Pharaoh, sailing the length of

Egypt to present the Ramesseum drama at the

principal holy centers of the land, showing

himself everywhere in a ship, as the god

does to his people in the underworld. 250

Figure 41. The surprisingly large ramps leading up to this valley temple of an Old Kingdom pyramid

demonstrate their ritual nature. Pyramid of Pepy II, ca. 2150 B.C. In the same way, the large mud brick replica of a boat evokes the movement of the sun in the heavens. Sun temple of Niuserre, Abu-Ghurob,

ca. 2300 B.C.

The Egyptian obsession with ritual ships

was natural, as Émile Chassinat points out,

to people who spent their days on the water

and had to go everywhere by boat. 251 With all this concern for water, it is significant, as

Hornung notes, that the Egyptians have no

word or concept personifying water or

waters in general: they have no god of seas

or lakes, as other people do, and have no

fish or fishy gods of any kind. 252 They were

nearer to reality than that in their ordinances.

For them, all things are renewed with “the

reawakening of the world after the flood,”

quite in the biblical sense, 253 and the rebirth of all things from the waters suggests some

sort of real historical event.

Meadows of Rest

Line 12: “Meadows of Rest”

Why this rendering instead of the

conventional “Field of Offerings”? Because

we think it fits the context better. The word

for field, sḫ.t, here employed in the plural, is

“marshland, field, country,” with marshland

coming first;254 it is Feld, Weideland. 255 It is a lush bottomland in which there is lots of

water, so that we may think of it either as

land with water everywhere or as water with

land everywhere, as indicated in the first

part of the Papyrus Westcar or in Greek and

Roman pictures like the Praeneste mosaic; it

is “a region of fertile fields washed by water. … It is an archipelago.” 256 The ideogram for sḫ.t depicts a tract of land

“covered or bordered by rushes”; in the

language, “sḫ.t designates a muddy or

marshy terrain,” which is just what all Egypt

was at the time of the retreating or advancing

inundation. Because the sḫ.t was “that lower land which … remained wet into the

summer,” it was a paradise on earth, the

greenest, lushest, wildest part of the

country.257 In the Amduat, the name given throughout to the successive fields of the

duat (underworld) is simply n.t, meaning

“body of water,” Wasserfläche.258 In our Breathings text, the sḫ.t ḥtp (Field of Rest or Offering) is definitely a place, written with

the determinatives both for sitting down

( ḥms) and for “village” or “inhabited

region.” 259

It is peculiar that “nowhere [do] the texts

state clearly that the sḫ.t ḥtp.t is in the West, but they rather place it in the sky.” 260 Victor Loret suggests that the Egyptians, for whom

it was a real place, first transplanted it to

Asia and then to Phoenicia, moving it ever

farther north until it ended up as an

imaginary place in the sky, near the Great

Bear.261 The Field of Rest ( sḫ.t ḥtp) is constantly identified with the better-known

Field of Reeds ( sḫ.t ỉ ȝrw), flooded and

green, 262 for the reed must grow in both land and water at once. Indeed, Kees renders sḫ.t

ỉʿȝrw as “Reed-field” or “Reed-pond. ”263

The place was not a swamp, however, but

prime farmland, a domaine de l’abondance;

264 indeed, as usually described, the Field of Reeds is “the City (of Re); its walls are of

bronze, its barley is five cubits high,” etc.265

In Coffin Text 159, it is a great cultivated

enclosure, 266 and in a Thirteenth Dynasty

inscription the Field of Reeds is the temple itself. 267 The two fields seem to have been side by side—“My booth is in the Field of

Reeds, I have ȝgb in the Field of Ḥtpw” 268—

and hence were confused by the

Egyptians,269 whose pictures of heavenly and earthly waters and fields are already

jumbled together in the Coffin Texts in a

perplexing mosaic. 270 In Papyrus Sȩkowski, the Field of Reeds is preeminently the “pure

place,” 271 which may account for the strange fact that it is never mentioned in the dark and

sinister Amduat.272

Between the choice of “fields” and

“ponds” which Kees gives us for sḫ.(w). t, we choose “meadows” as the best middle

ground, being strongly prejudiced by the

memory of an old and extremely sentimental

Mormon hymn, which resounded through our

childhood but is heard no more, about “the

meadows of rest.” 273 “In the famous 22nd Yasht … at day-break, the soul of the pious man seems to be among plants and sweet-smelling things, … ‘the most fragrant wind I

have ever smelled.’” 274

In the Amduat, almost every strenuous and

dangerous leg of the journey is followed by

the formula ḥtp m-ḫt, or, more commonly,

ḥp.t ỉn ḥm n nṯr pn ʿȝ m (qrr.t ṯn n.t), the former rendered by Hornung verweilen

danach and the latter meaning “resting by the majesty of this great god in (this cavern of)

… ,” indicating that the new stage of his

journey is introduced by a rest after what has

just been passed through. Here, the coming

forth from the waters, the sailing forth of the

ship, the sunrise, and the labors of birth are

all equated and all followed by brief but

necessary rest. 275 Upon completing a leg of the dangerous water journey, the traveler sets

foot in the “resting place of the underworld

dwellers.” 276 Just so, Re, after his victory over the waters, ordered that “a Field of

Repose ( ḥtp) be stretched out, and so the

Field of Rest came into being”; 277 and in the important beautiful festival of the valley, the

king crosses the river to land at a specially

prepared place called “resting place for the

head of the gods. ”278 The ultimate stage or goal, in fact, of any royal or divine

procession was a special resting place, a

state of ḥtp, which is the fitting reward for all righteous effort and weary journeying.279

After the king defeats Apophis, who tries to

prevent his crossing of the waters, his “heart

rejoices in thy secret domains; thou reposest

( ḥtp=k) in thy Meadows of Turquoise. ”280

Jéquier, emphasizing the watery aspect of the

place, renders Sekhet Hotep ( sḫ.t ḥtp) “Sea of Repose,” specifying that ḥtp here means rest and not offerings, 281 whereas Jan Zandee

calls it “the field of foods.” 282

There is no great conflict here, however;

the contestant, traveler, or candidate who has

undergone strenuous purifications—or, for

that matter, the babe who has just passed

through the birth shock283—needs not only rest and recuperation but also nourishment to

restore exhausted strength. Sḫ.t ḥtp is rightly rendered “Field of Offerings,” since a sacral

meal is the first thing on the agenda after

completing the ritual trial or journey; the

candidate crosses “in the ferry-boat of

flame” to the Field of Offerings for a feast in

the presence of the great gods of

Heliopolis. 284 The normal activity of resting after a journey includes the taking of

refreshment, and the funeral meal was such a

refection. The typical order of the events is

seen in the following: “Every god in his sḫ.t

is on the way of your bark. … You bathe in

the pool of Qbḥw. … You are clothed in the

linen of Ptah, washed by Hathor; you have ample room in the bark … they bring a box

of natron … you eat the pure bread of

Letopolis … and Heliopolis.” 285 As a purification, the Christian baptism was

always followed up by a ritual meal. Barguet

gives us another rendering of sḫ.t ḥtp when he calls it the “Champagne des Félicités

( ḥtp),” which is a “domaine de l’abondance

… un lieu privilégié de séjour, de repos par

excellence,” in which the food offerings are

very much in place but rest and relaxation

are the main concerns. 286 The candidate, washed and cleansed, is “like bwt crossing heaven in death; crossing these two heavens,

bringing me with you. I eat where you eat,

drink where you drink. I hasten through

heaven; I travel about in heaven. My booth is

in the Field of Reeds, my fill of eating ( ȝgb) in the Field of Ḥtp.” 287 Throughout the ancient world, the ritual booth of green

boughs is the scene of the feast of abundance by the waterside.

Ḥtp can mean rest, peace, offerings, food, contentment, satisfaction, felicity, etc., all of

which are essentially related in the present

context. We give priority to “rest” because of

strong resemblance to the Christian

anapausis, or refrigerium, the place or state in which all spirits find themselves

immediately after death for a period of rest

and recuperation while awaiting things to

come. Roman Catholic scholars have been

quick to recognize the Egyptian-Osirian

origin of the concept. 288 The four great releases that call for thanksgiving and

relaxation, according to the Talmud, are

(1) the crossing of the sea, (2) the crossing

of a desert, (3) recovery from illness, and

(4) release from prison, 289 all of which fit the present situation of the dead.

Meadows of Grasshoppers

Lines 12–13: “on the north side of the Field of Grasshoppers”

To try to locate the real prototype of such a

place in the Egyptian terrain does violence

to the texts, Grieshammer protests, since they

only mean to depict an unworldly place of

transition ( Zwischenreich), a spirit land. 290

No doubt most Egyptians had seen fields full

of grasshoppers. Were such fields desirable

places for sojourn or not? Does being on the

north, or windward, side mean that one was

free of the pests? It could be a miscopying,

for in the corresponding passage of the Book

of the Dead we read: “No member of me is

without Maat! I am pure in the southern

place; I am saved in the northern city. Pure is

the Field of Grasshoppers” (fig. 42).291

Thausing suggests that this field represents

“the realm of earthly power ( die irdische

Machtsphäre).” 292 But why grasshoppers, of all things? Their devastating hosts made

them, for the Egyptians, a symbol of both

vast multitudes and debilitating weakness;293

but the grasshopper also appears in

important funerary scenes, such as at the

psychostasy, or weighing of the soul (fig.

43),294 and in scenes in which the dead mount to heaven as grasshoppers. 295 Drioton suggests that the mention of grasshoppers in

Book of the Dead 125 (the source of our

Book of Breathings passage) has a hermetic

or secret significance, referring perhaps to

the idea that grasshoppers may turn into the

souls of the dead. 296 In Pyramid Text 467

§891d, Pharaoh goes to heaven in the form of

a grasshopper,297 a creature whose capacity to transfer itself from one place to another

through the void by effortless but instant

projection is even more spectacular than the

performance of birds. The dead who

receives the water of life from the lady in the

sycamore tree (see p. 279, fig. 92) in the

well-known scene from the Book of the

Dead is also shown as a locust. 298 Ludwig Keimer concludes that the “Field of

Grasshoppers” is perhaps a place where the

dead “live in [that] form,” though that does

not exclude the existence of infested fields in

Egypt. 299

Figure 42. The deceased approaches the cricket on

the tomb. From BD 36, as reproduced in Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, 1: pl. 49. Courtesy of National Museum of Antiquities, Leiden.

Figure 43. Anubis steadies the heart plumb bob as

well as the Maat figure on the left to balance the heart of the deceased on the right. The cricket waits at the foot of the scales of psychostasy. Redrawn; courtesy of Cairo Museum.

What makes the grasshopper a special

representative of spiritual reality is not so

much its uncanny power for negotiating

empty space as its unearthly and immortal

voice, its “spontaneous natural song better

than the measured strains of Eunomus.” 300

Apparently, the ancients were aware of the

strange circumstance that grasshoppers can

sing their song regardless of what is done to

their sound organs.301 The voice of Tetyx is certainly the nearest thing in nature to that of

a disembodied spirit;302 the ancients

believed it lived on air alone. 303 Even more mysterious is the association of the

grasshopper’s rhythmic singing with the

sun, 304 the timing of the creature’s chirps bearing a definite relationship to the

temperature of the summer air.305 It is the dawn, Eos, who is the patroness of the all-but-disembodied song of Tithonos, 306 and it has been found that grasshopper eggs always

hatch either at dawn at twenty-two degrees

Celsius or at sunset at eleven degrees

Celsius, thus establishing that uncanny

relationship between the life-cycles of sun

and grasshopper of which the ancients seem

to have been aware. 307 The ancient Cretans placed the grasshopper at the entrance to the

underworld as a guide of the dead, 308 in which office the grasshopper or mantis

appears in Book of the Dead 76 and 104.

In Book of the Dead 76 and 104, the soul

is led by the insect bȝy.t or bbȝy.t, a

cicada. 309 Suzanne Ratie, examining real grasshoppers found on the persons of

Egyptian mummies, asks whether they could

have been put there deliberately in “a rite

purposely designed to facilitate the wakening

of the dead and his identification with the

sun.” She notes that, besides the remains of

grasshoppers, the bones of birds are found

with the mummies, perhaps symbolic of that

other creature of the sun, the benu-bird.310 In very ancient rites the dead was

“transformed,” first into a grasshopper “to

prevent his dying,” and then into a bee “in

which there is nothing perishable.” 311 Since the bee was believed throughout the ancient

world to possess the secret of immortality,

the presence of the grasshopper in this

context must also be taken seriously.

The Ladies Edjo (Wȝḏy.t) and

Nekhbet

Lines 13–14: “Edjo ( Wȝḏy.t, Uto) and Nekhbet have made thee pure in the eighth

hour of the night, in the eighth hour of the

day”

In the Kerasher Book of Breathings it is

the ninth hour of the night, in the Joseph

Smith version the fourth (Baer reads it as the

third) hour; but in most versions it is the

eighth. Though in the Osiris mysteries “every

hour had its special protecting god and its

particular rites,” 312 the texts show great flexibility in the assignment of ordinances

and ministering deities.313 It is important that rites be timed for coordination with the

motions of the cosmos.

Though Anthes maintains that it is

impossible to derive the name Edjo or Uto

from Wȝḏy.t, the name written here,314 still both names are ever associated with the

papyrus stalk and the serpent. The lady is

represented holding a papyrus stalk ( wȝḏ) or

standing on one ( ḥry.t wȝḏ=s). Her companion, “Horus in Buto,” is also called

“Horus on his papyrus stalk ( Ḥr ḥry

wȝḏ=f),” being himself the youthful “Sprout in Khemmis.” 315 Khemmis is in the marshes of the north, “which we have found it

impossible to locate.” 316 There the lady hid the infant Horus from his deadly enemy Seth,

taking the equally deadly form of a serpent to

protect him.317 Acting also as the nurse of the youthful god, Edjo (Uto)—who protected

“the living falcon, son of Re,” with his

papyrus scepter of life—shot her arrows or

venom318 against his enemies as she did against the enemies of Re in the primordial

age when her name was Sekhmet. 319 Horus-falcon and king are often called wȝḏ,

“Sprout,” 320 referring to whatever is green and fresh;321 the name Edjo refers specifically to the fresh green of the young

papyrus. The wȝḏ or green thing on which the lady is supported can also be a lotus, with

all its symbolism. 322 As Wȝḏy.t (Edjo, Uto, or Buto)323 takes care of the divine infant at birth, so she presides also over his rebirth; it

is she who announces that Osiris is

resurrected as the newborn Horus,

“Onnophris the Blessed, who rejuvenated

himself. ”324 Her special function is to help in getting things started, for which reason she is

called “The Opener of the Two Lands. ”325

As “the Green One,” she causes things to

thrive and flourish, especially the dead

body. 326 The sound of her name suggests all these things and more, as does the symbol

with which it is written, until we end up, as

Derchain notes, with “pure verbalism,” all

things returning to the set theme of life. 327

Thus in Pyramid Text 438 §810, Horus is

called “the First One of Khemmis,” Khem

being Ḫm or Letopolis, also called Buto; in

turn, “Buto on her lotus stalk protects the son of Osiris” since she is “the embodiment of

Utit-Buto (as a serpent) in Pe and Dep

[prehistoric shrines], sitting on her lotus

stalk to give protection to the infant in his

nest.” 328 Khemmis is often called the Nest and is written with the nest ideogram.

Nekhbet was the companion of Wȝḏy.t

(Edjo), working with her to take care of the

infant Horus. She is the vulture-lady, but she

is also a plant—the lotus of Upper Egypt;

with her Lower Egyptian counterpart she

protects the babe in the nest, making his

crown terrible to all his enemies in the

powerfully prophylactic form of a deadly

serpent.329 At the beginning of Papyrus Carlsberg I, Nekhbet is shown as the vulture

of El-Kab (Nekheb) enthroned on a papyrus

thicket, while the sun rises out of the waters,

as in the beginning, as a falcon, “on the

southeast side, behind Punt.” 330 Even as

Nekhbet can assume a serpent form like her sister Edjo, so the latter can, on occasion,

take the form of a vulture.331 It was because she was worshipped from prehistoric times

at Nekheb, south of Thebes near the ancient

capital of Hierakonpolis (the hawk city), that

Nekhbet in time became the lady of all

Upper Egypt, according to Bonnet. As “the

White One,” she is both the white crown of

the south and the white headcloth worn by

the king. 332 As a vulture, she hovers protectively over the king and so “fuses with

the Theban vulture-goddess Mut,” whose

name means “mother” and whose arms

overshadow the king from the ceiling of his

funeral chamber and the lid of his

sarcophagus.333 The need for two ladies to receive the newborn infant or spirit is

readily explained by Herman te Velde, who

points out that it was normal in Egypt for

important infants to be equally close to

mother and (wet) nurse334—Nekhbet is Mut, the mother, and Edjo the nurse. At his

coronation, the youthful Ramses II is shown

seated between Nekhbet and Edjo, who

embrace him together. 335 These two ladies are identified with the much better known

pair of Isis and Nephthys, a reminder that in

the mysteries everyone has two mothers, 336

an earthly and a heavenly. Indeed, according

to Spiegel, all Egyptian goddesses are to be identified by their names and epithets as the

mother-goddess. 337

In the fourteenth hour of the Amduat, while

the washing with snṯr and ḥsmn takes place, the candidate is told, “Nekhbet is on thy

south side and Edjo on thy north side to

protect thy ka.” 338 The presence and office of these ladies makes it clear that the subject

is being introduced into a new and

unfamiliar world and needs protection

during his time of helpless innocence, in the

manner of the infant Horus—innocent because, in passing through the waters of

birth, he is also cleansed of all former faults:

“He who was in a state of weakness cometh.

… The Osiris, the royal scribe, hath

appeared on the thighs of Isis, and he sitteth

on the thighs of Nephthys. … Isis, give thy

breast to Osiris,” etc.339 The midwives are the Two Ladies themselves, who receive the

child and then wash it; in the Eighteenth

Dynasty, Nekhbet was identified with Heket,

goddess of childbirth.340 The Two Ladies

“bear Osiris” by bringing him forth from the

waters. 341 The five basic Egyptian rites of washing, anointing, clothing, naming (and

other insignia), and feeding are all essential

to welcoming a newborn babe into the world

(see p. 445, fig. 143).

In Papyrus Bremner-Rhind we see the

ladies treating the king first as a newborn

infant342 and then in much the same manner

as a bridegroom. 343 Even at the coronation,

“quite unexpectedly, his spouse Amaunĕ

suckles the young monarch, for that very

purpose spirited back into babyhood. ”344 In the same spirit, finally, the dead is washed

and dried, rubbed and censed, and nourished

“to stimulate his physical powers,” even

receiving nourishment from the breast.345

Even in their serpentine forms as Rnn.t, the ladies represent “the growing and nourishing

principle.” 346 They hail the king as Onnophris, the newborn Horus, and as

“Sprout,” the green and growing one.347 The identification of both ladies with the lotus

(Uto means lotus town, while Nekhbet

actually means lotus bud) combines the ideas

of fragrance and refreshment with rebirth.

Identification of the ḥsmn of our text as

“soda of Nekhbet in Upper Egypt” 348 further involves the lady Nekhbet in lustral

operations. The fact that each of the ladies

has a waterpot reminds Elliot Smith of John 3:4–6, “born of water,” or the mother’s

womb.349 Papyrus Bremner-Rhind makes it apparent that the reception of the young king

by the Two Ladies was actually dramatized

in a ritual presentation—“The entire temple

shall be sanctified, and there shall be

brought in two women,” etc. 350—where we are dealing with a temple ordinance and not

just a funeral rite. Anthes would carry ritual

identification to the limit, suggesting that the

king not only bears the titles of the Two

Ladies but actually is the two, even as he really is a female serpent351—all of which emphasizes the importance of the matriarchal

principle in Egyptian royal succession, a

point that receives particular stress in the

Book of Abraham.

With regard to the infancy of the candidate,

Macrobius recalls that “on the shortest day

of the year the Egyptians bring from the

temple an infant who represents the newborn sun.” 352 This is related to our Breathings text by a Berlin papyrus in which, at the winter

solstice, twin priestesses, representing Isis

and Nephthys, would carry out the

dramatization of the birth of Horus, calling

out to the newborn god: “Thou comest as …

the sun and the moon!” They invite Horus to

come and be nursed, while they summon his

father Osiris to behold his son as king of

gods and men.353

The birth of the sun as the child

Harpocrates takes place when the winter

solstice falls at the full moon, at the Isia

festival, when the Egyptians would put on

white clothes and crown themselves. 354

Neith of the White Crown is also Nephthys

of the Red, and her androgynous beard

emphasizes her ambivalent character. 355 The birth of the god at the solstice was also his

resurrection, marked by the setting up of the

green sheaf, or djed-pillar. 356 In Oedipus at Colonus that hero, preparatory to being

introduced into the mysteries, must be

washed by his two daughters, who then

become his mourning women, exactly in the

manner of Isis and Nephthys. 357

The Opening of the Mouth Rite: Its

Purpose and Origin

This is one place to discuss the famous

Opening of the Mouth ceremony, a very

ancient sequence of rites which, in the longer

texts, contains in reduced form the entire

Egyptian initiation or endowment (fig.

44).358 The Opening of the Mouth rite can represent at one and the same time both

baptism and coronation, libation and ritual

meal. 359 In the Joseph Smith and de Horrack versions, it comes as the final step to

preparing the initiate for a journey: “Thou

seest with thine eye, thou hearest with thy

two ears, thou speakest with thy mouth, thou

walkest with thy two legs.” 360

Figure 44. Some steps in the Opening of the Mouth in which the sem-priest, clothed in a leopard-skin garment and representing the son, anoints the mouth of the statue or mummy, while the ẖry-ḥb, or master of ceremonies, text in hand, presides. The subject then receives sacred white scarves or bandlets from the sem-priest. Tomb of Petemenophis, ca. 600 B.C.

As reproduced in Dümichen, Grabpalast des

Patuamenap, pl. VIII.

This is a typically reduced version of the

formula. Here it begins not with the mouth

but with the eyes, the symbol of complete

restoration and possession of one’s faculties,

and gets no farther than the walking with the

two legs, indicating that the purpose of

introducing it here is to get the initiate

started on his way. The purification accompanying the Opening of the Mouth is

“before all else an act of reanimation,” its

purpose being, according to Otto, “to insure

the physical integrity of the deceased” ;361 it is a “baptism” having the physical effect of

counteracting the decay of the body.362 The Opening of the Mouth itself was nothing less

than “a miracle … which restored to each

[organ] its proper functions.” 363 The main purpose, wrote Maspero, is to restore all the

parts and organs of the body so that they will

never be lost again.364 By it, the organs and parts of the body, after having been properly

assembled, are put again “in working

order.” 365 The Opening of the Mouth is “the final ritual of incorporation,” and “only

when the ritual of ‘Opening the Mouth’ has

been performed has his [the deceased’s]

position ultimately been fixed in the

beyond.” 366 The ordinance insures that each

part of the body, by virtue of remaining pure and intact, will never again lose its proper

function. 367 It is specifically an anointing to seal the body up against the day of the

resurrection, its total restoration being

anticipated by a ritual reversing of the effect

of the “blows of death” on each member of

the body. It thus fulfils the same function as

mummification—namely, that of restoring or

re-creating the members of the body on a

permanent basis.368

The Opening of the Mouth ordinance is of

prehistoric antiquity. 369 By the Pyramid Age it had undergone so much alteration and

reprocessing that “no historical

reconstruction of the ritual … can be given,”

and it is quite impossible at this date to

reconstruct the complex original rite from the

sources. 370 But though, among the eighty-odd versions studied by Otto, no two are exactly

alike, it is apparent that all have a common

nature and background,371 the basic structure being preserved intact down through the

ages. 372 The peculiar formula by which the survival of the age-old ordinance can be

readily and easily recognized turns up in

every age, now in one ritual context and now

in another, but always with the same purpose

of restoring the function of the various bodily

organs. What we have in our Book of

Breathings is only a fragmentary snatch of

the Opening of the Mouth, but this is typical:

“Thou seest with thine eyes, (or, mayest thou

see, etc., that thou mayest see, etc.), thou

hearest (Mayest thou hear …) with thy two

ears, thou speakest with thy mouth, thou

walkest with thy two legs.” The Goyon Book

of Breathings makes more of it, referring to

the rite three times: “Ptah, Father of the

Gods, (turn) thy face toward me that thou

mayest open [my mouth?] for me; mayest

thou open for me my two eyes, as thou didst

for Sokar in the Golden House at Memphis.

Open my mouth with the adze of meteoric

iron.” 373 “Mayest thou give me my mouth for speech, my legs for walking; let me have my

two arms to overthrow all mine enemies. ”374

“I am mighty like Atum! I walk with my legs,

I speak with my mouth, I see with mine eyes,

I hear with my ears; I am Lord of life,

renewing life eternally!” 375 Here the legs come first because this passage has been

describing the initiate as one marching

against his enemies. This Breathings source

lays strong emphasis on the identity of the

officiant who carries out the rite as Ptah, par

excellence the creator-god of the Egyptians

from the earliest times, thus making it

perfectly clear that resurrection can only be

effected by the same power and authority

which brought about the creation, being

actually a new creation on a new level. Thus

in the tomb of Petosiris we read: “Ptah [and]

Sokar open thy mouth! … I am Ptah who opens thy mouth. … Thy body is the body of

Atum forever!” 376 And at the creation of man in the Book of Breathings, “it is Atum in the

capacity of Ptah who activates the heart. ”377

The importance of the rite, as well as its

antiquity, is attested by its prominence at an

equally early time in both Egypt and

Babylonia. Though “the Egyptians did not get

the rite from the Babylonians,” as Blackman

sees it, “it is just possible that the

Babylonians borrowed the rite from

Egypt. ”378 It is also found in ancient India. 379

Though the Opening of the Mouth belongs

to the funeral rites, it plainly did not

originate as such: Otto notes that none of the

typical funerary priestly titles appears in any

known version of the rite, and both he and

Morenz point out that the business is plainly

not funerary in origin but is, by very nature,

an ordinance for the living and takes place in

the temple. 380

Though originally it centers entirely

around the person of the king,381 the rite of Opening the Mouth is found in private tombs

as early as the Fourth Dynasty; 382 when adapted to the Isis cult, the Opening of the

Mouth ordinance was thought of as taking

place in the next world. 383 The ceremony is not limited to a narrow situation but “was

evidently performed in a great variety of

situations. ”384 It takes place in “the ritual place, … which is not a tomb … but a

chamber or workshop ( Werkstatt). ”385 While the gods figure prominently in the mortuary

rites, there is no mention of gods at all in the

Opening of the Mouth ordinance until the

sixteenth scene, when the reason for their

appearance is, according to Otto,

“uncertain.” 386 Though by the New Kingdom it had taken the form of a dramatic

presentation, 387 Otto holds that it was originally neither mythical nor dramatic. 388

The substitution of a statue for the dead in

the Opening of the Mouth ceremony readily

gave rise to the false idea that the rite was,

first and last, concerned with animating the

statue instead of the individual for which it

was substituted. 389 The operation begins with “the candidate standing on sand, facing

south, nude, by day, his clothes behind

him,” 390 obviously a living person. This would be awkward when dealing with a

dead subject, and so his mummy—or, more

convenient still, his statue—took his

place. 391 The twelfth scene is the making of the statue, which represents the creation of

the body of man and is also compared to

conception and birth, thus making clear that

the real object of the rites is not the statue as

such but the living body. 392 The fact that the statue is baptized, anointed, and clothed just

like a living person shows that it is substituting for such.393 Certain important episodes originally had nothing to do with

statue rites with which they later became

confused, according to Otto, the actual

Opening of the Mouth being performed on

the king’s own mouth and not on any

statue. 394 If the Opening of the Mouth was

“supposed to open not only the mouth of the

statue, but the eyes and ears as well, indeed

endow it with the faculties of a living

person,” 395 the emphasis was all on the living person, who was revived and

resurrected by the offices, which were all

performed in his name. Indeed, those persons

upon whose statues ordinances of exaltation

( Erhöhung) were performed in the temples

were more often living people than dead. 396

The Opening of the Mouth Rite as

an Anointing

Basically, the Opening of the Mouth rite was an anointing. As Moret sums it up,

“One was anointed on the mouth, eyes, ears,

and different parts of the reconstituted body.

…Thus the mouth, eyes, and ears can

breathe, speak, and eat; see; and hear [Thus

the mouth … can breathe, speak, and eat; the

eyes can see; and the ears can hear]; the arms

can act, and the legs can walk.” Moret is

careful to specify, however, that the oil

always follows a washing with water397—

the necessary preparation, as we have seen,

for all important ordinances. 398 In Babylonia and India, as in Egypt, the Opening of the

Mouth was an integral part of washing and

purification rites, 399 of which it could be either a part or the whole. Thus, in the old

pyramid rites it seems to have been the first

step in more than one major phase of the

ordinances: it must come before the king

receives the oils, the garments, and the

simple ritual meal. 400 Later, when the wooden coffin is placed in the stone

sarcophagus to initiate an important phase of

the ritual journey, the corpse is sanctified by

a new series of ordinances, beginning again

with an Opening of the Mouth. 401 As preparations are underway for the final

heavenly ascent, the “mystery play” is

performed again, first preceded by an

Opening of the Mouth performed on the

statue, as it had been the preceding time done

on the corpse itself in the coffin chamber. 402

Thus the Opening of the Mouth can be

performed repeatedly in the course of a long

initiation, each time as the first act of an

important and distinct phase of the divine

progression. The Opening of the Mouth is not

the last service performed for the dead, but it

must immediately precede it. 403

The reconstituting of the body by the

Opening of the Mouth rite assured its rebirth

to a higher existence, the ultimate goals of the ordinance being, according to Otto,

exaltation ( Verklärung, śȝḫ.t,

transfiguration) and snṯr, which means both purification and deification. 404 In Babylonia, a corresponding rite was performed “on

priests at their consecration and on other

occasions,” whenever they needed to renew

their spiritual power. 405 This Babylonian version took place in the bît têdišti, the

“House of Renewal,” where the subject,

after being washed, was clothed first in red

to signify death and then in white, portending

his future glory. 406

The Oil of Healing: Reversing the

Blows of Death

The purpose of the oil, as of the water,

was to revive the parts anointed: “I have

filled thy face with metchet [ mḏ.t] oil,” the formula begins—meaning, as Budge points

out, restoring it completely. 407 “O thou oil upon the brow of this Horus! … Thou shalt

be placed by me on the brow of the chief

H̱er-ḥeb … and the possession thereof shall

make him to become an akh [i.e., give him

superhuman perception]. Grant that he may

have power over his body, that his eyes may

be opened that he may see. ”408 The scene entitled “Anointing” in the Opening of the

Mouth texts is specifically “to restore the

face.” 409 The oil most commonly used was bȝq-oil, as the oil of the Moringa

arabica, 410 though olive oil is found in the private Opening of the Mouth rites as early

as the Fourth Dynasty. 411 In their love of scents and unguents, the Egyptians

elaborated the oil motif: “I have filled thee,

O A.men-Rā … with the Eye of Horus—

Metchet [ mḏ.t]-[oil, the] Festival Scent

[ ḥb.t], … [the] Oil of Praise [ ḥknw], …

Sefi-oil [ sfṯ], … Nem-oil. … ‘The Eye of

Horus … is united to the oil. Ṯua-oil [ dwȝ].

… Ḥātent-āsh oil [ ḥȝt.t-ʿš]. Ḥātent Theḥennu oil [ ḥȝt.t-ṯḥnw]. … A.ber oil [ ỉbr]. … Beq oil [ bȝq]. … Anoint thyself therewith!’” 412

Like the other initiatory ordinances, the

Opening of the Mouth is an imitation birth—

or, rather, rebirth rite—and the use of the oil

is conspicuous in that connection. The

“anointing” scene413 ends with the declaration: “O NN! Thy mother hath borne

thee on this day. Thou art created to be one

who knows what is not known; Geb hath

made thee immortal (invulnerable). … He

gives thee thy head; he joins thy members

together … after thou hast received thy head,

… thy two eyes. … He joins thy head to thy

bones. … (The sem- priest speaks): Ointment of ḥknw-oil. O Osiris, … I fill thy face for thee with ointment! ”414 And in another version: “Ye unguents, … place yourselves

before Osiris. I have made him to be happy

through you. I have made him to become Akh through you, placing his power in his body.

… I have filled your eyes with Mḏ.t-oil,

your head with Mḏ.t-oil.” 415

“It hath knitted together thy bones, it hath

gathered together thy members,” etc.416 The whole Opening of the Mouth rite, being “a

miracle … which restored to each [organ] its

proper functions” 417 and the “main purpose”

of which, indeed, “is to restore all the parts

and organs of the body so that they will

never be lost again,” 418 was by nature a healing of the sick. 419 By precept and example, we are taught that the purpose of

the Opening of the Mouth is to reverse the

blows of death.420 As sickness is not a normal state of things, so the final disaster

that befalls the body was never thought of as

a mere running down or breaking down but

always as the result of a willful attack

against it by destroying powers. The famous

wedjat- eye, the perfect or restored eye, is the completely resurrected flesh, healed of

the blows inflicted on it by the enemy; it is

the moon restored to its fulness, just as the ỉ

ȝḫ.t-eye is the Sun’s Eye, “the Right Eye of Re,” restored to its fulness after eclipse. 421

Before Pharaoh can sit on the throne again at

the periodic ritual renewals of his power, he

must be “cured of his deadly wounds,” 422

inflicted on him by his mortal enemy, Seth.

The king on the lion couch feigns death, but

“he falls beneath the blows of his enemies

only to rise again triumphant and glorious,”

embodying the victory of light over the

darkness.423 In another papyrus, “The Great One awakes. … Osiris has risen to his feet.

Verily, his son Horus saved him from Seth.

… [H]e heals the pain which was in his

flesh. His arm is given to him by Horus. His

feet are given to him by Geb.” 424 The Breathings text of Sensaos designates the

initiate as “Horus the Great, who has healed (caused to be nfr) the members of Re and

placed Horus on the throne of his father.” 425

The funerary rites of the Anchnesneferibre

coffin open with Thoth addressing Osiris: “I

have come from the Great House with the

divine command to provide thee with

protection. Anubis will heal thy wounds. He

will reunite thy members and thy flesh.” 426

The flesh of Osiris is restored in the wʿb.t,

the place of washing and anointing. 427 Atum assists, telling the candidate Osiris that he

has driven off Apophis, the destroyer, “and

healed thy wounds.” 428 This particular rite is for the restoring of a sick person whose

condition is compared with that of the

smitten Osiris and whose ailment is

attributed to the blows of the enemy, the

serpent.429 The king of the Hittites went through a rite, the formula of which closely

follows that of the Opening of the Mouth and

which is meant to be both a restoration and a healing. “Anoint ye the King, anoint his eyes,

take away his illness, … take away his

harnapistas, take away the sickness of his head, take away the evil doing of man, take

away care, take away weakness of the knee,

take away sickness of the heart. … He goes

to the mountain … youthful vigor has been

restored to him, strength he has restored to

him.” 430 Likewise, the Babylonian Gilgamesh, after he had lost his bout with

death and the serpent, received a washing at

the “washing-place,” namsû, which removed his defilement and healed his sores.431

The symbolic inflicting of the blows of

death is an important and dramatic part of the

Egyptian Opening of the Mouth ordinance.

As soon as the creation of the body is

completed in the form of the finished

statue, 432 the workers begin to beat the statue with blows that are described as both painful

and damaging, while the sem-priest cries:

“Do not smite my father! Do not seize his

head! ”433 The officiants who do the beating ask absolution of the sem for the crime of beating his father, eager to clear themselves

of a charge of sacrilege toward a holy

object.434 This reminds one of how the priest who made the first incision in a body being

prepared for mummification was ritually

execrated and pursued as a murderer,

showing that the embalming begins with a

ritual murder. 435 The Egyptians smite the dead, says the ancient satirist Lucian, after

he has already been murdered. 436 In the Opening of the Mouth rite, the word used for

“smiting” the statue is ḥwỉ, which means

“smiting to slay,” indicating that it is the

dramatization of a sacrificial death. At a

later phase (or, rather, reduplication) of the

rites, the Horus-eye is smitten with the

nḫȝḫȝ-whip. 437 Though the sem-priests order

the workers to stop the smiting, 438 it is an indispensable part of the story; and in some

versions the priest himself regretfully inflicts

the fatal blows, saying, “I am thy beloved [or

loving] son,” whereupon he smites the statue

with the staff in his right hand: “I have cut off

his leg; … thou hast cut off thine eye; thy

soul is in it. ”439

Next, animals are slaughtered, with the

cutting off of various members. 440 The sem smites “the bull of the South,” tears its heart

out, and cuts off its left foreleg (fig. 45); then

“two gazelles and a smen-goose” are

beheaded; then, with the announcement “No

further attack shall be made upon this god!”

the heart of the bull is taken to the statue, 441

while the severed leg is held to its mouth,

both to revive the dead and to assure his

deliverance by a substitute sacrifice (fig.

46). At the same time, the chief priest ( ẖry

ḥb) holds aloft the sḫm-scepter442 as a proof

of divine power. In the next scene, the mouth

is officially opened by the adze of meteoric

iron closely resembling the leg in shape and

size. The ultimate test of magical or divine

power in Egypt was to cut off a member of

the body and then restore it again, as we

learn from the famous episode in Papyrus

Westcar, wherein the holy man, Dedi, forbids

the experiment on a human being as

improper. 443

Figure 45. A bull is sacrificed and its left foreleg (called the “arm”) is cut off for a demonstration of power, while the sem-priest holds aloft the ʿbȝ- or sḫm- scepter, the symbol of power over physical things. Tomb of Petemenophis, ca. 600 B.C. As

reproduced in Dümichen, Grabpalast des

Patuamenap, pl. I.

Figure 46. The foreleg is brought forward “to open the mouth and eyes,” as the inscription says, by its touch. The subject, Seti I, is standing on a bag of sand. To the right, an adzelike instrument of meteoric iron is substituted for the leg to open the mouth; the instrument is shaped both like the severed leg and the constellation of Ursa Major and is called the “Great Magician.” Restored and adapted from the tomb of

Seti I, ca. 1290 B.C.

Throughout the ancient world, the paradox

of resurrection is visualized as an active

reversal of the blows of death. Thus in the

Metternich Stela, the Opening of the Mouth

formula is recited by “Thoth who has come

from heaven” to expel the poison of a

serpent from the body of a victim, member

by member. 444 Osiris, fatally wounded by Seth, is called upon to “Arise and live …

that thou mayest reverse ( wd) the damage inflicted on thee!” It is always Horus the

Avenger, the Protector, who makes good the

damage after it has been inflicted, reversing

the blows by the Opening of the Mouth.445

The theme is restitution: “They have brought

me my bones and joined together my

members; they have brought to me what was

taken from me.…My eyes have been opened

that I might see with them. … My ears have

been opened that I might hear with them. …

The green is at my throat, breath is not cut off

from my nose, there is wind in the passages.

… Geb supports me, my staff is in my hand, I

have power over the destroyer.” 446 In the ever-popular motif of the “contest of the

magicians,” we see that every poison has its

antidote and every blow its counterblow. 447

Thus in an old Babylonian version, “each

time Enki names an organ of the body that

pains him, … Ninḫursag announces the birth

of a corresponding deity” to reverse the blow and remove the pain. 448

According to Kurt Sethe, the most

important secrets of the Egyptian mysteries

had to do with certain wounds

( Verletzungen) inflicted on a divine

personage. 449 They had to do with sanctification, for in Egypt at all times the

“smiting [of] a man or animal … was an act

of consecration or dedication,” making the

smitten thing “the property of the god.” 450 In sacrificial situations substitution is

important, and in the earliest times part of

the Opening of the Mouth was the enveloping

of the candidate in the skin of an animal, 451 a sacrificial beast with which he was

identified. 452 These ideas are reflected in the important Spell 132 of the Coffin Texts: “I

give sacrifice (praise) to the gods, even a

blood sacrifice (an ox) to the Lord of

Heliopolis, I being with their bonds because

I am truly the sacrificial bread of Re, fainting from wounds.” 453

Jewish and Christian Parallels

What it is all about can be better

understood from Jewish and Christian

sources, which are by no means unrelated to

the Egyptian. Indeed, Czermak compares the

Egyptian Opening of the Mouth to the

awakening of Adam in the Genesis

account, 454 and an early Christian tombstone found in Egypt compares the deceased to

Adam, who has been smitten with the blows

of death. 455 This last refers to the old Hebrew tradition that when Adam fell and

sinned he became subject to the blows of

death. For when Adam ate of the forbidden

fruit, God said, “Behold, I will bring upon

thy body, seventy blows; with divers griefs,

shalt thou be tormented, beginning at thy

head and thine eyes and thine ears down to

thy nails on thy toes, and in every separate limb.” This is the chastisement for “all our

race.” 456 The like applies to Adam’s posterity, for when Israel falls, God says,

“Since thou hast abandoned my covenant, I

have brought upon thy body seventy-two

strokes; the trouble of the first stroke is a

pain of the eyes, the second stroke an

affection of the hearing, and likewise in turn

all the strokes shall befall thee.” 457 The wages of sin is death, and the dead body is

chided at an old-fashioned Jewish funeral

because its members no longer function, and

each one is struck an impatient and accusing

blow. This is the chîbût ha-keber: “On the third day the departed is treated with

increased rigour. Blows are struck on his

eyes because he would not see, on his ears

because he would not hear, on his lips

because they uttered profanities, on his

tongue because it bore false testimony

against his neighbour, on his feet because they ran toward evil-doing.” 458

Accordingly, when at the end of his life Adam felt the accumulating effect of these

mortal blows upon him and sensed the

approach of death, he implored Eve, “Go

with my son Seth near to paradise … and

pray God to … send his angel to paradise,

and give me of the tree out of which the oil

floweth, and bring it me, and I shall anoint

myself and shall have rest from my

complaint. ”459 He was asking for the “oil of mercy,” which alone could reverse the seven

blows of death inflicted as a result of the

fall.460 For the ultimate healing of the oil of mercy was not to be given to men until the

coming of the Messiah, as Eve and Seth

were informed by an angel who met them on

the way back to the garden to fetch the oil for

Adam.461 When the Messiah did come, according to the Clementine Recognitions,

he provided that all who come to his

kingdom should be anointed with the oil of

the tree of life, the very oil with which the Father had anointed him to be the initium

omnium. 462 The final culmination of the whole plan of salvation, according to a very

old Judeo-Christian writing, will be when

Michael opens the gates and bestows the

healing oil on the righteous as “the hundred-

fold reward of those who have worked and

toiled diligently. ”463

The idea of the reversing of the blows of

death by a special anointing is a common

link between the pious Jewish sectaries and

the early Christians. Thus in the very early

Syriac Testament of Our Lord, the

candidates for baptism are exorcised by the

bishop, who blows on them (cf. snsn),

signing them upon the brow, the nostrils, the

breast, the ears, etc. Then he blesses the oil

and says, “I anoint you with oil for the

liberation from all evil spirits and from all

evil.” Upon emerging from the water, the

candidates are again anointed “with the oil of grace” (Adam’s “oil of mercy”). 464 The Christian Coptic rites seem to hark back to

the old Egyptian tradition, for the purpose of

the anointing is to bring together again those

“members which have been scattered [and

separated] since the foundation of the

world, ”465 that being also the purpose of the Opening of the Mouth rite, as we have seen.

In the Gospel of Philip, the real meaning of the story of the Good Samaritan is pointed

out, for the wine and oil and the meal

provided for the sorely wounded man could,

to the faithful, refer only to the ordinances of

anointing and sacrament, by which one is

healed from the mortal wounds of this sinful

world. 466 Theologians are just beginning to see the implications behind these things.467

In early Christian sources, the ministry of

Christ pointedly reverses the work of Satan,

the destroyer. One of the earliest texts tells

how Christ redeemed Adam and healed the wounds inflicted on his posterity by the

enemy, death. 468 Another tells how the Lord descended to the lower world and “treated

with healing medicine the wound which the

Enemy had inflicted on His Son. … He

brought back Adam again to the state

wherein he was at first, and he forgave

them.” 469

Christ’s first recorded miracle shows how

closely healing and forgiving go together. 470

His healing miracles were pointedly a

reversal of Satan’s blows, many expressly

performed by the denouncing and driving out

of evil spirits (see Mark 1:23–25); in Mark

6:13 he uses olive oil; he touches the eyes to

heal them (Matthew 9:29; Mark 8:23–25); he

heals the blind and the deaf

daimonizomenos, one who is possessed of

an evil spirit (Matthew 12:22).

One may often detect echoes of the

Opening of the Mouth rite in early Christian literature and liturgy. Thus in the Psalm of

Thomas the gatekeeper asks of the candidate,

“Do his eyes see well? Does his mouth

speak the truth? Are his hands pure? Is his

heart firm? Do his feet run in the path of

truth? … Who drinks of this wine is made

strong in his eyes, … heart, mind, etc. ”471 So also in the related Odes of Solomon: “In

Him I have acquired eyes, … ears have

become mine and I have heard this truth. … I

have walked towards him in the way of truth.

… Death has been destroyed before my

face.” 472And in the rites of the Mandaeans one is blessed at the washing “to see with

your eyes, speak with your mouth, hear with

your ears,” etc. 473 The Jewish equivalent of the Pythagorean “cup of Lethe” is the well-known tradition that, at the moment of birth,

an angel gives every child a blow on the

upper lip (the mark can still be seen there!),

which makes him forget everything he knew before coming into this earth life, and that at

the resurrection another blow will reverse

the effect of the first. 474 One purpose of the Egyptian Opening of the Mouth is to cause

the initiate “to remember what he had

forgotten”475—that is, to awaken the mind to its full potential in the manner of the

awakening of Adam in a new world. 476

Baptism, says Cyril of Jerusalem, is “the

antitype of Christ’s sufferings,” including an

anointing from the crown of the head to the

feet for the sake of making one a “son,” a

complete participant. 477 For this, “the head and brow are anointed to reverse the blows

against Adam” and to make the mind clear

and perceptive. “Then your ears, that you

might receive the audible parts of the holy

ordinances. … Next come the nostrils … that

you may say, ‘We are the sweet odor of

Christ to God among the saved.’” 478

As every Christian knows, Christ’s ministry was one of healing. He sends the

twelve out like an army to heal, drive out

demons, and “preach the kingdom of God”

(Luke 9:1–2); and later, Paul “went about …

healing all those who had been smitten by the

devil, for God was with him” (Acts 10:38).

After the evil one has laid a heavy hand on

his victims, Jesus lays his hands on and they are cured. The early fathers recognized the

significance of this: “Christ suffered death,”

says Polycarp, “and was raised from the

death, thereby undoing the bonds of hell. ”479

A Babylonian text speaks of an evil spirit

who has subjected one to “the ordinances of

death,” against which God (Ea) performs the

ordinances of life. The evil ordinances are

the familiar ones—but in reverse. The

candidate is washed with filthy water, he

eats unclean things, he anoints himself with

evil-smelling oil, and in the end his spirit

joins the evil spirits when the blows of death are inflicted upon him. 480 Ignatius refers to

“the evil-smelling oil … of this world” with

which the wicked are initiated into its

ways, 481 and the Gospel of Philip makes pointed contrast between the oil with which

the good Samaritan healed and the evil-

smelling oil of this world. 482

He came to mend ( ad reparationem) a

defective world, says Peter in the

Recognitions. 483 He comes to reverse, as it were, the laws of entropy and decay: “Tell

John … that the blind see, the lame walk, …

the deaf hear,” etc. (Luke 7:22; cf. Matthew

11:4–5), the exact reverse of the usual order

of things. “The Antichrist came, but Christ

also came,” writes Cyprian, “the Enemy

raged and rampaged, but forthwith the Lord

followed, to avenge our sufferings and

wounds.” 484 Most enlightening is the way in which the events of the crucifixion exactly

reverse those of the creation: the three glorious beings become three condemned

criminals (or, rather, the Creator’s

counselors are two thieves); the

acclamations by the host of heaven become

the mockings of a mob; the garments of glory

become carnival frippery; the one who gave

life to all is now put to death—they “killed

the Prince of life” (Acts 3:15); the new wine

of the kingdom is vinegar; the foundations of

the earth, instead of being established, are

completely shaken; instead of light of the

new age breaking forth, a great darkness

covers the earth; instead of Satan being cast

out, he formally declares himself the victor

(Luke 22:53); he who heard Adam’s call for

aid and came to him now utters Adam’s cry

for help (Matthew 27:46); the veil of the

temple is parted—in reverse and by violence

(Matthew 27:51); the spirits, instead of

coming down to earth, come up out of the

earth (Matthew 27:52); the stone is sealed, not to assure but to prevent resurrection

(Matthew 27:66), etc. It is all backwards.

The most impressive reversal of ordinances

is in the case of Judas: he gives the kiss or

embrace, the aspasmos of the initiate, but it is for betrayal (Matthew 26:47–49). In his

case, the Opening of the Mouth is reversed,

according to the Coptic Bartholomew: his

tongue is cut out, his eye destroyed, his hair

plucked out, etc.; his name is removed from

the roll of the Saints, the book of life; his

inheritance is taken away; his tablet (seal) is

broken in pieces; his oil is poured out; his

garment is rent; his office ( episkopē) is

removed; his crown is snatched away from

him; his lamp is put out, etc. 485 All this is consistent with the reversal of the order of

the creation, which Judas initiated at the

crucifixion. In Papyrus Salt 825, death and

the “deceitful tomb” become themselves the

victims of decomposition and dissolution!486

Thoth has so arranged that Horus and Seth

inflict exactly equal blows on each other and

so end with a perfectly even score, after

which both are healed.487 In the Egyptian story of Truth and Falsehood, it is the very

knife which was the cause of Truth’s undoing

that, in the end, vindicates him and destroys

Falsehood. 488

The Number of Blows (7 and 70)

The number of blows administered is a

significant clue to the common origin and

great antiquity of these things. As we have

seen, the “oil of mercy” was to reverse the

effect of the seven blows of death inflicted

upon Adam. The seven blows of death are

mentioned in early Jewish and Christian

writings in other connections. 489 In the Testament of Abraham, that patriarch is

shown “the 7 heads of death” as dragon

heads, “and the fourteen aspects of death,”

which specifically represent “the different

modes of death” possible. 490 According to an early Coptic Christian writing, these

seven blows go back to the premortal

existence and were shown to Adam. 491 A well-known variation of the seven is the

seventy and the seventy-two blows that

afflict fallen Adam and fallen Israel

respectively. A Twentieth Dynasty Egyptian

papyrus “enumerated seventy different kinds

of death, or rather seventy different agents …

of death.” 492

Besides the number, we are told explicitly

what the blows are. They are against the

“seven natures: the flesh for hearing, the eyes

for seeing, the breath to smell, the veins to

touch, the blood for taste, and bones for

endurance, and the intelligence for joy” ;493

or against life, sight, hearing, smell, speech,

taste, procreation.494 There is an eighth

spirit, which is that of sleep. The lists differ, but the idea is always the same: man has

certain spirits or functions placed in the

body, and “each of these spirits has an evil

spirit to abuse and oppose it.” 495

Ages before the texts from which we have

been quoting were written, the concepts they

convey were familiar to the Egyptians, who

specifically mention the use of seven oils in

the Opening of the Mouth ritual496 and “the fourteen holy members” of the body to be

treated.497 Speaking of the ritual death of the god, “some (Egyptians) say that … the

members of his body were afflicted by

undergoing seven blows.” 498 The picture of Moses’s serpent-staff consuming seven

Egyptian serpents in a contest with the

magicians is anticipated in a purely Egyptian

version of such a contest: “I am the serpent,

the bull of the Ennead who is not subject to

magic ( lit. who does not obey ḥkȝw). ”499 “I

swallow the seven serpents. … I have not yielded to evil charms. … I have placed my

enemies beneath my sandals, and made

myself their master, as Re commanded. ”500

“NN is this serpent the bull of Nut, … the

Great One of Atum, who swallows the seven

uraeuses, ”501 etc. Apophis, the great serpent who represents the powers of death and

destruction in the ritual texts, is rendered

helpless by being smitten with seven knives

(fig. 47). 502 In our Book of Breathings, the candidate is put in jeopardy seven times.

Adam did not get his oil of mercy, as noted

above, because Eve and Seth were met on

the way to the garden by an angel, who told

them that it was not to be had until the

coming of the Messiah.503 According to Rabbi Akiba, when Michael and Gabriel

finally lead all the sinners out of the lower

world, “they will wash and anoint [them],

healing them of their wounds of hell, and

will clothe them with beautiful, clean

garments and bring them into the presence of

God.” 504

Figure 47. The serpent (Apophis), attempting to arrest the eternal progression of the subject (here

represented by the scarab “Ra” of “becoming,” or

transition, and the heavenly wings), is smitten and rendered helpless by seven deadly knives. Thoth, with the written authorization and instructions, stands resolutely at the prow. After P. Louvre N. 3292, a Breathings text. Courtesy of Louvre Museum,

Egyptian Antiquities Department.

The Members Affected

The lists of members touched in the

Opening of the Mouth vary in length and

content, sometimes reflecting the special purpose for which the rite is performed, as

in Pyramid Text 213 §135, when the object is

travel: “Thy forearms, arms, belly, back,

buttocks, feet are those of Atum; thy face is

that of Anubis. Thus thou journeyest through

the regions of Horus and the domain of

Seth.” 505 Typical of one of the fuller lists is the anointing of Re himself, who receives the

oil on head, cranium, brow, eyes, nose,

mouth, tongue, teeth, lips, chin, back, arms,

heart, belly, buttocks, thighs, legs, feet, and

toes, in that order.506 The specific function of each part is usually named, as in the tomb of

Tutankhamen: “I open thy mouth that thou

mightest speak with it, thine eyes that thou

mightest behold Re, thine ears that thou

mayest hear the words of glorification (or

exaltation), thy legs to walk with, thy breast

and thine arms to drive off thine enemies.” 507

The rite is called the Opening of the Mouth

because that must come first, that being the organ by which one may breathe, receive

nourishment, and speak: it is the oral passage

that makes higher organic life possible. So

the mouth comes first; but to rise above mere

vegetation, life must become conscious and

aware, so that the opening of the eyes

immediately follows. With these two organs

the individual is, so to speak, in business.

The mouth is necessary if the dead is to

“possess the physical capacity and the divine

qualities necessary to receiving and enjoying

the sacrifices, and hence to endless life.” 508

“All the forces of life are in thee; thou

eatest with thy mouth, thou seest with thine

eyes, thou hearest with thine ears,” 509 but the mouth necessarily comes first in animating

and reviving the body. The Egyptian,

however, valued the mouth most for its

highest function, that of speech; the initial

impulse to life is the divine word, and

whoever utters such a word must first have his mouth opened and purified. The Egyptian

could only attain to divinity “through the

creative word,” by which “he speaks what

God himself speaks; i.e., he thinks and he

acts.” 510 Whereas other sense organs do but one thing each, the mouth not only conveys

sustenance and air to the body—as well as

the most elemental forms of awareness and

enjoyment in taste and feeling—but, in the

other direction, emits the highest expressions

of thought, the divine words, before the

council of the gods.511 Ben Sira preserves the Egyptian order of priority: “He created

for them tongue and eyes and ears and He

gave them a heart to understand.” 512 A very early Christian hymn tells us how God has

given us “a tongue for harmony … and taste,

… and power to see, and to hear the sound,

and breathing of the air, and hands to work,

and feet to go about on, ”513 again giving the

mouth first place. Accordingly, the cleansing of the mouth comes first; and as the king of

Egypt was washed by two priests masked as

Horus and Thoth, they gave him natron to

chew to make his mouth “like the mouth of a

calf of milk on the day it was born,” 514 “as pure as that of a newborn babe,” “like that of

a newborn calf of Mother Isis,” he being the

youthful sun-god. 515 For the Babylonians also, the washing of the mouth was the first

step in reviving the body.516 Moses hesitated to address Pharaoh with ritually impure lips

(Exodus 6:12, 30). The priority of the mouth

is affirmed in the Shabako text, which at first

sight seems to refute it: we read that the great

council of the gods created the eyes to see,

the ears to hear, the breath of the nose to

convey information to the heart, and the heart

to bring forth all knowledge through the

mouth by agency of the tongue; but it was the

uttering of the creative word in the first

place that made all this possible.517

If the first motion toward life and creation

is with the mouth, the consummation of the

process is the opening of the eyes. As Erich

Ebeling puts it, “Acceptance [among the

gods] is achieved by the solemn opening of

the eyes. … The divine child can henceforth

see. The last act of the new creation is

completed.” 518 In the Stundenwache, the creation of Osiris by Geb is completed only

when he opens his eyes, “his blind eyes. ”519

Indeed, the wḏȝ.t, or completed eye, is the symbol of the whole restored body. In the

formula “O my father, I have opened thy

mouth and eyes!” the essentials of the

Opening of the Mouth are completed, the rest

being secondary.520

As to the implements that were used, we

see Horus—always representing (or

represented by) the son of the deceased521—

as he “pressed with his fingers, or touched

with ritual instruments, the mouth, the eyes, the ears, the various parts of the body,

imitating the movement proper to each organ,

restoring to Osiris the use of his eyes to see

with, his ears to hear with, his mouth to eat

and talk with, his hands to work with, and

his legs to walk with.” 522 The son would touch the mouth with his little finger (see

color plate 8, as well as p. 435, fig. 138) or

open the mouth and eyes by touching them

with an artificial finger made of electrum “in

a gesture of transmission of life,” which

suggests to Otto the healing episode in Mark

7:33. 523 Various forms of contact and stimulation seem to have been tried, to judge

by modern interpreters: “They opened the

mouth and the eyes … either by massaging

them with the detached members of the

typhonian victims, or by touching them with

special instruments, or else by imitating the

gesture of consecration by the use of cloths,

vestments, or oils.” 524

But the special instrument for the Egyptian

Opening of the Mouth was a kind of chisel

made of meteoric iron or copper and shaped

like an adze, which seems to have been sort

of a conductor of power. 525 It was called the nṯr.ty-implement, meaning “that which makes divine,” 526 and the psš-kf “with which the mouth of every god and goddess is

opened.” 527 “Thy mouth is opened … by Ptah, … by Sokar, with the chisel of bronze

with which the mouths of the gods were

opened.” 528 It was also known as the “Great Magician” or “Wonder-Worker,” since its

operation was not understood: “It is a

miracle … which restored to each [organ] its

proper functions.” 529 Since this same chisel ( nw, stp) is shown in the hands of priestly artisans cutting out statues and mummy cases,

its creative function is obvious: it is at once

the instrument of creation, of sacrificial

death, and of resurrection. 530

Many drawings and reliefs show the sem-

priest touching the mouth of an image or

mummy with this implement. He goes over

the whole body, reciting: “I open your mouth

that you may breathe, eat, and speak; I open

your ears that you may act, your eyes that you

may see.” By this act, the faculties of the

body are rendered ḏ.t, physically

everlasting.531 The strange adzelike tool has rich cosmic associations aside from its

meteoric iron. Its shape is patterned after the

constellation of Ursa Major, or the Big

Dipper, and the four members (legs and

arms) of the person treated are likened in the

Pyramid Texts to the four sons of Horus

because they carry him and represent four

stars of the bowl of the dipper, leading the

whole company of seven—the seven stars of

the constellation known as msḫtyw, which is also the name given to the instrument. 532 The

material of the gadget, as well as its name, suggests a sort of conductor of electrical

power from the sky, an impression

strengthened by the requirement that the

recipient of the Opening of the Mouth always

stand on a mound of perfectly sterile sand or

on a Stone of Truth533—an effective nonconductor, reminding one of the heavily

insulated (with wool) stone on which the

Roman haruspex sat when in contact with

the powers of the sky.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 14–

20

14. … Come thou, Osiris, God’s Father,

Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-

15 (1/15). tȝ.wy, Justified, that thou mayest enter into the broad Hall of the

Two Maats since thou hast been

cleansed from all defilement

16. and all sin. Stone of Truth is thy name!

Hail, God’s Father, Prophet of Amon-Re, 17. King of the Gods, Prophet of Min-Amon,

Wsỉr-Wr [ JSP: the Osiris Hor], Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy,

18. Justified! Thou enterest into the duat in a state of perfect (great) purity ( or by the great purification), with which the Two Maats have washed thee in the great

hall ( or court).

19. There has been performed for thee, yea,

there has been performed for thee a

washing in the Hall ( or Court) of Geb; thy members have been purified in the Hall

( or Court)

20 (1/20). of Shu.

Commentary

The initiate is addressed with the same

titles as those preceding lines 11–12. The

express purpose of the preceding washing

and clothing is to prepare the candidate (the

king) “to go to the temple.” 534

Purification in the Annex

Lines 14–15: “Come thou, Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified, that thou mayest enter into the broad Hall of the Two Maats”

The imperative followed by sḏm=f

indicates that the candidate, having

completed the preliminary rites, is now free

to enter the temple proper. Blackman, on the

evidence of this very text, notes that “the

Osirian dead” had to be “cleansed from all

evil, every abomination, ” “before entering the Hall of the Two Rights.” 535 At Edfu, the pr-mḏȝ.t, or House of Books, was a small

room “on the west part of the south wall of

the antechamber of the temple,” matching a

like room on the east side of the wall, where

the king was purified, “baptized,” from eight

golden jars. 536 After the first hour in the

wʿb.t, 537 one passed into the glories of the heavenly house. 538 “The two great wise women who washed her say, ‘Let him enter,

all the sins which she committed in her

earthly life having been purged away’ [or, by

a play on words, ‘All her sins having been

removed in his temple on earth’ ( m wnḏt=f

tp tḏ)]. 539 Let her not raise her voice ( lit.

shout), for she must know that such noise is

an abomination to me and has no place ( lit.

does not enter) in my house. ”540 The same order of things follows in Coffin Text 35,

where the candidate is first purified541 and then enters into the main building ( ḫm wr), 542

where he is “introduced into the secret

teachings.” 543 Inscriptions in Egyptian temples make it clear that the worship was

not static but moved from room to room, 544

the basic feeling of the thing being that of

penetrating ever deeper into the building and

the things it teaches. 545 “You leave the chamber of Osiris,” says Breathings text

Leiden T 32, “and circulate in the broad Hall

of the Two Maats; … you proceed through

the temple without being held up,”

everything being described in terms of

initiation. 546

Entering the Great Hall

A momentous step was the entering of the

first room of the temple proper: the great hall

( wsḫ.t), representing “the first part of the other world.” 547 In the Sensaos Breathings papyrus it is called the “Great Hall of the

Field of Reeds,” being connected with the

washing rooms.548 The great hall is either the first room of the temple or the court adjacent

to it. At Karnak, according to Helck, it was

the large court between four pylons at the

entrance, where washing and clothing took

place preparatory to entering the temple

itself;549 in the Eighteenth Dynasty the purification took place in the court before the

entrance to the fourth pylon, acting as a sort

of annex. 550 Petition for entrance to the next world refers to this as “the Hall of the Field

of Reeds” : “O gods who inhabit the Great

Hall of the Double Maat, gods who inhabit

the Great Hall of the Field of Reeds! … Turn

thy face toward me, O Hathor, Regent of

Amenti, and thou, O Maat, by whom one

reaches Amenti, that I may enter.” 551 In the Book of the Dead, chapter 125, which

matches our Breathings text: “Words spoken

on entering the Hall of the Two Maats to

behold the countenances of the gods that are

there. The shedding of all the sins of a man’s

mortal existence.” 552 Thausing suggests that the Hall of the Two Maats is the same thing

as “the Land of Maat—the Beyond,” a higher

state of existence. 553 Thus the wʿb.t of embalming in the funeral rites is to be

regarded as the same room as the wʿb.t of washing in the temple ordinances (fig.

48).554 Bernhard Grdseloff suggests that the pr wʿb, or house of purification, was an

embalming establishment immediately

adjacent to the archaic “tent of purification,”

being “in direct imitation of the valley

temples,” the funerary washing being an

adaption of the washing of the living in the

temple rites. 555 Kees notes that the temple service, or function of the house of worship

( ỉr.t pr dwȝ), called for a vestry of some sort, large enough for the “ritual purification

and investing with ritual garments and

insignia before entering the inner rooms of

the temple,” 556 the wʿb.t, or washing room, being equivalent to pr dwȝ, or place of

worship. Certainly, funerary scenes showing

the washing of the dead “resemble … the

scene of the Pharaoh being purified in the

‘House of the Morning,’ and were possibly

intentionally approximated to it.” 557

Figure 48. Alabaster slab of Sheshonq I, who took to Egypt the treasures of Solomon’s temple (1 Kings

14:25–26; 2 Chronicles 12:2–9). The inscription says that he ordered “as a splendid work” for his father a wʿb.t, meaning in this context a washing place. Is this a Stone of Truth? It is interesting that the name of Sheshonq also appears in Facsimile 2, fig. 8, of the Book of Abraham. Drawn from fragments on site of

the embalming house of the Apis-bull at Mit Rahina, ca. 930 B.C.

As part of his final examination, the

candidate is going to be asked to name the

parts of the Hall of the Two Maats. 558 As this is the first room in the temple, to enter this

great hall is to enter the temple itself. Once

one is there, the main problem—that of

getting into the place at all—is solved; the

initiate has as good as graduated, for the gate of the temple was itself the entrance to

heaven. 559 In stepping over its threshold, one leaves the mundane world behind; the holy

place was “like heaven,” as the pilgrims’

graffiti report. Some suggest that the two

pylons at the entrance of every temple are the

Two Ladies, as they are the two lions

(Yesterday and Tomorrow). 560 The two lions of the “Aker” figure, always facing in

opposite directions and having one body, are

often identified with Isis and Nephthys, the

ladies who renew and purify the dead

Osiris.561 The two towers of the temple pylons are also the two mountains between

which the sun rises to new life on the

morning of creation, etc. (fig. 49; cf. pp.

230–31, fig. 69D). 562

Figure 49. The sun rises over the temple pylon. At the same time, it is seen on the horizon, mounting to

heaven between two lions known as Yesterday and

Tomorrow. This drawing is part of a well-known

scene representing that interval of time while the body remains in the tomb and the spirit dwells in a pleasant paradise, awaiting the resurrection. P.

Wesay, Khary, ca. 1250 B.C. BM 9949 © Copyright

The British Museum.

The presence of Maat is necessary at the

moment one enters the temple to guarantee

that one is a bona fide candidate for eternal

glory and is qualified to enter the holy place.

For Maat’s presence signifies that all is

correct and in order563—the equivalent of a temple recommend. Maat alone, of all

deities, participates in all the rites of the

temple. 564 Even in the Amduat, it is the Two Maats who tow the god’s bark through the

first gate at the first hour of his journey. 565

The high official who, after performing initiatory purification, opened the two doors

of heaven and the gates of the shrine,

clothing and anointing the image of the god in

the daily temple rites, was both identified

with Maat and called the “lieutenant of

Maat” ;566 while the proper and correct observance of the temple ordinances, as well

as the officials administering those

ordinances, are characterized as being

“completely filled with Maat.” 567 Maat herself is not a regular deity: she has no

temple, cult, or mythology of her own; 568 and though she preserves her identity, she is

more easily adapted to representing abstract

ideas than any other Egyptian divinity. 569 She can also be substituted for any other deity

more readily than anybody else since she

represents par excellence “the embodiment

of every principle of social order.” 570 As

“both a concept and a goddess,” representing

“truth, justice and order in corporate life …

based on the cosmic order,” she “constitutes

the fundamental idea of ancient Egyptian

religion” of all truth being encompassed in

one great whole. 571 Hence there is no objection to her being encompassed in one

great whole: Maat “is the symbol ( Merkmal)

… of the entire concept of godhead. ”572 Her presence is the assurance that what is being

done is not only in accordance with the mind

and will of God but duly and legally

registered according to every correct form

and procedure.

Texts and pictures of the mysteries always

begin with the candidate presenting an

offering (fig. 50; cf. p. 240, fig. 72, and color

plate 6) and requesting permission to enter

and “behold the god,” that being his ultimate

objective. Thus the scribe Ani begins his

initiation by bringing offerings to Re just at

sunrise with the petition that God endow him

with “glory, power, and righteousness ( mȝʿ-

ḫrw)” so that he may “go up” and “look upon Re-Harakhti” (see p. 378, fig. 120).573

Pharaoh Piankhi, having been purified and

having received the sdb-garment, mounts the stairs of the temple of Re at Heliopolis “to

behold the god”; 574 while in another temple the candidate, having been washed and

clothed, passes through a door bearing the

inscription: “Come with me into the House

of God and behold thy father the speckled

bird,” 575 that being the symbolic form of Re-Horakhty.

Figure 50. The candidate petitions for admission,

usually at sunrise. Between the upraised hands of praise and supplication (the spiritual ka-symbol) are the food offerings she has brought, and on the floor are vessels of water and ointment for her washing

and anointing. JSP IV (BD 105). © Intellectual

Reserve, Inc.

Significance of the Two Maats

But why “the Two Maats”? The Great Hall

of Judgment also goes by the name of the

Hall of the Two Maats, which Sethe calls the

“Halle der beiden Wahrheiten. ”576 Bruno Stricker takes mȝʿ.ty as a nisbe form and reads, not “Hall of the Two Maats,” but

rather “the Hall of the Truth-lovers” ;577 but that leaves altogether too much unexplained.

In psychostasy scenes, the dead is seen

standing between two mȝʿ.ty to be judged.578

Thausing suggests that the Two Maats

represent “esoteric and exoteric truth, ”579 or the inner and outer truth of things580—an idea that Bonnet also favors. 581 Breasted saw a

grammatical force in doubling the lady as an

“idiom of intensification.” 582 Others posit that the duality reflects that mystic dualism

which invests all aspects of Egyptian

belief. 583 Of course, the Two Maats have been held to represent Upper and Lower

Egypt in the manner of the Two Ladies Edjo

and Nekhbet, 584 later identified with Isis and Nephthys (fig. 51). 585

Figure 51. A goddess (sometimes identified with

Nephthys) holding two maat-feathers is the intermediary between the depths of the tomb and the highest heavens, to which the beetle (scarab)

represents the necessary stages of transition. This fragment of a coffin lid shows the connection

between the breathing motif (note the

superabundance of wings and feathers) and the lion-couch theme of Facsimile 1 of the Book of Abraham.

Photograph from Nibley Archives.

Since Maat is the constant companion of

the sun,586 she takes on the dual aspect of his journey naturally as the Two Daughters of the

sun-god; and when she is in the underworld,

she is “Maaty (Two Maats) on the Ways of

Darkness.” 587 The two solar barks are also called the mȝʿ.ty (Two Maats), 588 and the god’s nocturnal bark is towed over the

“waters of Re” by the Two Maats.589 The Two Maats can also be the two heavenly

eyes of day and night. 590 It is specifically in their association with Re, the sun-god, that

the Two Maats express the “dualistic

thinking of the Egyptians,” according to

Grieshammer. 591 Maat, in the role of Isis,

Hathor, Nephthys, etc., can also represent the female element in things “analogous to the

male universal God,” with whom she is

associated and even identified. 592 Her peculiar power to identify with others while

remaining uniquely herself is in itself a

special claim to duality. Though already

mentioned in Pyramid Text 260 §317a, the

Two Maats first make their formal

appearance in the Book of the Dead in the

Hall of the Two Maats.593 “The interpretation of the Two Maats,” Jan

Bergman concludes, “is still completely

unsettled ( äusserst umstritten)” among

Egyptologists,594 a verdict confirmed by te Velde: “Duplication of a goddess or pairs of

goddesses [is] often found in Egyptian

religion. … In all these cases we have little

or no indication as to the nature of the

division. ”595 In Israel “the voice of Jacob …

is attached to two females, … the Wisdom

which is … Thought” and the Wisdom which

is uttered. 596

Figure 52. The Two Maats, wearing maat- feathers, enfold Ramses III in their protective embrace. They give him “protection, life, stability, dominion around him like the sun.” He is carried in his golden throne shrine flanked by lions and sphinxes. The officials also wear maat- fathers. Restored drawing from the funerary temple of Ramses III, Medinet Habu, ca.

1180 B.C.

As Edjo and Nekhbet represent the north

and south respectively, 597 the Two Maats

would seem to represent the east and west banks of the Nile, which are united even as

the Two Ladies join and fuse, with pointed

play on the word snsn. 598 In the temple reliefs at Medinet Habu, as the Two Maats

stand behind the king on his throne, they not

only have the same face as each other, but

they also have the same face as the king,

while the entire attendant multitude are seen

wearing the two feathers that stand for the

Two Maats, they too being in a condition of

“Maat” (fig. 52). 599

On one important point the students seem

to be in general agreement: the Two Maats

are not just a mechanical doubling or pair of

mirror images (fig. 53). They always seem to

represent a kind of polarity—

esoteric/exoteric, north/south, day/night,

living/dead, etc.—and so while Maat, by all

accounts, stands for the basic principle of

law and order by which all things exist, she

can only do so by presenting fundamental

duality, or the law of opposites, by which,

according to the Egyptians, there “must

needs be … opposition in all things” (cf.

2 Nephi 2:11–15).

Figure 53. The abstract nature of Maat is clearly

shown here, as well as the ease with which she can be doubled. Instead of a woman’s head, we see only a feather, the symbol of spirit, breath, light, and truth.

The subject being introduced to her wears the two

maat-feathers and is introduced by “Maat, the daughter of Re.” P. Pa-khar-khonsu (P. Turin 55), ca.

150 B.C. Courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

Recurrent Washings: Declared

Clean

Lines 15–16: “since thou hast been cleansed from all defilement and all sin”

Iw=k wʿb, taken as the familiar

circumstantial usage, indicates that the

candidate may enter the great hall because he

is now clean since the purification takes

place “before the entrance of the temple.” 600

Thus, “Wr.ty-ḥkȝw (the Two Great Wise

Women) have purified you and introduced

you into the great sanctuary of the secrets of

Abydos” ;601 again, the candidate is washed and censed “that he may enter the great

sanctuary ( ḫm, place of ordinance) with the initiates, that he may enter the secrets”

among them;602 only he who has been purified has the power to see “the hidden

things” and enter into the secrets. 603

A number of washing rooms are mentioned

in this section, and in line 18 we are told that

the Two Maats make the initiate clean in the

great hall. We need not think that there is only one ablution with sacred water in the

temple. Kees has called attention to a series

of temple reliefs in which the king is first

drenched with water, then “stands quietly,”

after “receiving the apron ( Schurz;

Shendot),” and next sits “on a simple throne”

washing his hands in a basin; the final scene

is labeled “entering the temple of Thothmes

III. ”604 Kees gives other examples of multiple washings605 and notes the Egyptian capacity for telescoping various rites into a

single gesture. 606 S·wʿb may in this case mean to declare clean or to pronounce clean,

as it does in referring to the consecration of

temple servants. 607 In a related case in Papyrus Sensaos, the expression smȝʿ-ḫrw

“is not ‘make justified,’” according to

Stricker, “but recognize ( erkennen,

acknowledge, pronounce) as justified” 608—

hence swʿb, “to pronounce clean.” Before he

can enter the Hall of the Two Maats, one leaves all one’s old sins behind, 609 just as later one is already vindicated ( smȝʿ-ḫrw) before he is ever permitted to enter the

sacred Judgment Hall of the Two Maats. 610

Ḫw.w, “defilements,” are any worldly

impurities or physical dirt that, if retained,

would desecrate the sacred place into which

the candidate now enters. It is more than

physical dirt, however; it is also evil deeds

in the sense of “impurity from which the

shrine is purged.” 611 Bw.t, the other word used in our text, is ritual defilement,

“taboo,” 612—the breaking of regulations and statutes rather than deeds of moral turpitude.

With the Egyptians, as with the early

Christians, moral, ritual, and physical

defilement are definitely related. 613

Stone of Truth

Hebrew and Christian Parallels

Line 16: “Stone of Truth is thy name”

Everybody agrees on this translation,

which is indeed inescapable. But what on

earth can it mean? It is obviously important;

standing out alone in a terse, self-contained

sentence apparently not connected with

anything else, it is a portentous utterance.

Chapter 125 of the Book of the Dead, the

main source of our Book of Breathings, gives

ample justification in seeing in this Stone of

Truth a thing of highest significance (fig. 54).

Figure 54. Osiris stands, covered with a sheath, on the Stone of Truth (the maat-symbol), facing the four sons of Horus. In front of each one, a stand

resembling the wadj- column of rebirth supports a jug of oil. The Two Ladies are labeled Isis and Nephthys, while their vulture and serpent headdresses show

them to be Edjo and Nekhbet; they are bestowing life and health on the god. The god Shu holds a snsn- sail at the end of the procession. Redrawn from Osiris

chapel on roof of temple of Isis, Philae, ca. A.D. 210.

“According to the Book of Breathings, ”

wrote Blackman, “the Osirian dead, before

entering the Hall of the Two Rights, were

purified by Uto and Nekhbet. … As a result

of this lustration they were ‘ cleansed from

all evil, every abomination, ’ and received the name ‘ Stone of Righteousness. ’”614 This illustrates the principle of receiving a new

name at an important stage of initiation; at

this point, one also receives a token—name

and stone go together. At once, one thinks of

Revelation 2:17: “To him that overcometh

will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and

will give him a white stone, and in the stone

a new name written, which no man knoweth

saving he that receiveth it.” The use of such a

tangible seal as a means of identification and

certification in the course of the mysteries is frequently met with. 615 In the Egyptian Opening of the Mouth rite, perhaps the oldest

form of the complicated purification rites,

“his mouth is opened … by the Two Stones

which are in the house of purification,” being

thus associated with the Two Maats as

“stones of truth.” Otto calls attention to T. J.

Colin Baly’s suggestion that the mysterious

object called ʿb.t used in opening the mouth was a rhomboid alabaster stone and suggests

connection with a number of white stones

found in prehistoric Egyptian graves.616 A Pyramid Text elaborates: “Thy mouth is

opened … by the Two Stones, … by Horus

with his little finger, ”617 which suggests interesting ties between Egypt and Israel.

The infant Abraham was nourished by two

white stones, one of which gave milk, the

other honey. 618 The Talmud reports, commenting on this, that in Egypt it was

believed that all abandoned babies (Abraham had been abandoned) were fed by

two such miraculous stones—plainly

showing where the legend came from. 619 A twelfth-century genizah says it was Gabriel

who suckled the infant Abraham, giving him

water from his little finger,620 recalling that in the Egyptian Opening of the Mouth ritual

the little finger could be used instead of a

stone and that “Isis nursed not with the breast

but with the finger.” 621 The association of Abraham with yet another Egyptian

ordinance calls attention to the surprising

interest among some mid-twentieth-century

Roman Catholics in viewing Abraham,

rather than Peter, as “the Rock. ”622 This is because Abraham was thought of as the

foundation stone of God’s work on earth.

David Flusser designates the stones of the

high priest’s breastplate in Israel, the stones

of Revelation 21, and those of 1QS VIII, 1,

in the Dead Sea Scrolls all as “foundation stones” since, among other things, they

represent the twelve tribes and so are

equivalent to the twelve apostles—the

pillars and foundation stones of the church—

representing both the temple and the New

Jerusalem.623 Abraham began his process of initiation at Bethel; he then passed on to

Egypt, and upon being fully “endowed”

returned again to Bethel, “the Perfect

Stone.” 624 In the Odes of Solomon we read,

“He was established upon the Rock of

Truth.” 625 In the same source the initiate, upon completing his test, receives “an

everlasting crown of Truth. Blessed are they

who set it on their heads; a Stone of Great

Price it is; … and Righteousness [cf. the

Egyptian Maat] hath taken it and given it to

you” —in Egypt, Maat conveys the crown

—“and all those who shall be written in the

book.” 626

According to Rabbi Eliezer, each of the twelve tribes was represented by a stone on

the breastplate of the high priest, and it was

said that Joshua could tell which tribe had

sinned when that tribe’s stone was dim. 627 In the text known as the Pastor (or Shepherd) of

Hermas, the members of the church are

stones; each is tested at the gate, and those

found to be “sons of iniquity” are cast

aside. 628 The same idea meets us in an early Coptic writing: “Narrow is the gate through

which the Lord leadeth His chosen,

according to the word of the stone of truth,

Matthew the Evangelist. ”629 The Stone of Truth is thus a stone of testing, like a

touchstone: “And I found the Stone, the Great

Interpreter. He took my hand and he gave us

his,” says the gardener, describing how he

met Jesus at the garden tomb on Easter

morning, according to the very old Gospel of

Bartholomew. 630

J. Massingberd Ford calls the stone of Peter and Abraham “the Jewel of

Discernment,” 631 thus lending belated support to Joseph Smith’s interpretation of

John 1:42 JST: “Thou shalt be called

Cephas, which is, by interpretation, a seer,

or a stone.” The image of Peter the Rock,

now viewed as an old and authentic Hebrew

concept, 632 throws a new light on a remarkable account of the setting apart of

Peter found in one of the oldest of Christian

writings, the Gospel of the Twelve Apostles,

in which the Lord says to Peter, “Come to me

on this stone, that I might give thee a blessing

and a name in all the world.” Peter then sits

on the stone; the Lord proceeds to pronounce

over him something like the Opening of the

Mouth formula: “Thy head shall never pain

thee, neither shall thine eyes fail thee,” nor

thy fingers falter, etc. 633 And the name he gives him is Peter—Seer Stone, Stone of

Truth. He gave him that name in return for Peter’s recognition “that Jesus was

Anointed,” 634 while the talk of gates and keys refers to the “much desired admission

to … the Temple,” with special “contrast

between the inescapable mass of the dead

and the community of the living”; 635 the whole episode must be viewed in “the

Temple context,” according to Vacher

Burch.636 There is much evidence that all-important Matthew 16:18–19 refers to

temple work as understood by the Latter-day

Saints. 637 The Coptic Apocalypse of Adam says that in the last days the righteous will be

found “on a high mountain, upon a rock of

truth ( hijn ou-petra nte-me). Therefore they

[the mountain and stone] will be named,

‘The Words of Immortality and Truth.’” 638

In all this we are dealing with a stone

which, “like the Urim and Thummim, …

judges between good and evil,” a “jewel of

discernment” which Ford equates with both the “precious … stone” of Isaiah 28:16 and

the “stone … of offense” of Isaiah 8:14–

22. 639 Also, the Babylonian “tablets of destiny may have been engraved precious

stones like the Urim and the Thummim,” 640

reminding us that in Israel “the Tablets of

[the] Law, as well as the Urim and Thummim

… [were] the instrument[s] by which the

will of the deity is communicated” —stones

of truth. 641 “Only a high priest who was permeated with the Holy Spirit” could

operate the Urim and Thummim. 642 There is evidence in the Dead Sea Scrolls that a

priest should be able to operate a Urim and

Thummim in judgment but that if the priest is

not expert, they should judge by lot, lots

being another form of divination.643 Even so, every man of truth may have his share of the

Urim and Thummim coming down from

Adam through the high priest: “A man of

discernment discerneth the Word, and the Law is faithful unto him as the Urim. ”644

Finally, we come down to the philosopher’s

stone, from which the Arabic numerals and

the alphabet and all the other basic aids to

civilization are derived. 645 Joseph Smith carried out the economy of the stone even to

the earth’s final state of glory when “this

earth, in its sanctified and immortal state,

will be made like unto crystal and will be a

Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who

dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining

to an inferior kingdom … will be manifest to

those who dwell on it. … Then the white

stone mentioned in Revelation 2:17, will

become a Urim and Thummim to each

individual who receives one, whereby things

pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms

[even all kingdoms] will be made known.

And a white stone is given to each of those

who come into the celestial kingdom,

whereon is a new name written, which no man knoweth save he that receiveth it. The

new name is the key word” (D&C 130:9–

11). In a famous Egyptian story, the great

King Cheops is denied possession of the

“seals” of the mysteries, which are hidden in

the temple of On in a flint box called

Testing. 646

The stone is a source and transmitter not

only of light, but also of power. It was no less than the symbol of high priestly

authority. At his coronation, Solomon

received the four stones of dominion from

the angels; by them he ruled all animals and

spirits on earth, and with them he could

summon the angels, for on the first of the four

was inscribed: “To God belongs the

greatness and might.” 647 The Jewish doctors interpret Abraham’s stone as meaning that

“Abraham had a sort of magnetic power, or

possessed some extraordinary means of

healing all physical defects by his mere presence.” 648 This was represented as a stone that he wore suspended from his neck,

“which possessed the power of healing the

sick who looked upon it.” 649 Following the type of the primordial Adam, according to

Geo Widengren, both the Phoenician and the

Israelite ruler wore the heavenly tablets

when they passed judgment, deciding the

destinies of the world. They were fastened to

his breast in a pouch in exactly the same

manner as Marduk wore them in Enuma

Elish IV, 121–22, and were the prototype of the Urim and Thummim.650 Ingolf Friedrich has shown that a pectoral, adorned with

jewels like the king’s pectoral, not only

belonged to the pure priestly vestments of

Israel, but, like the ephod and robe that went

with it, exactly matched the ritual

appointments worn in all Egyptian sacred

functions. 651 Finally, as his “guarantee of

dominion ( Unterpfand des Reiches),” the Byzantine emperor held a great round jewel

at his coronation; this passed from the hands

of the emperor Manuel Comnenus to appear

again in the hands of Baldwin at his

coronation as king of the Franks (who later

became king of Jerusalem and, hence, of the

world). 652 This was the sphere, globe, or Reichsapfel of clear crystal, the possession of which was thought to be both the symbol

and source of world dominion in the Middle

Ages.

Stone of Truth as a Foundation

Stone

The Stone of Truth is a foundation stone,

as the cornerstone of the Hebrew scriptures

was a pyramidion or sun-stone, Egyptian

style,653 the headstone of the corner. 654 As mentioned, Flusser designates the stones of

the twelve tribes and the twelve apostles, of

Peter and Abraham, of the high priest’s breastplate, of Revelation 21 and 1QS VIII,

1, all as Grundsteine, or foundation

stones.655 Ford sees in the precious stone, the Urim and Thummim, the ultimate

foundation stone that provides the foothold in

empty space which is the first prerequisite

for creating anything—it is the temple, the

pyramid. 656 There is a tradition that “the foundation-stone upon which God founded

the True Temple—the hagion kosmikon,

[i.e.] the World itself— … was the ‘living

Rock’—the patriarch Abraham.” 657

This is the eben šĕtiyyāh, which was

formed when twelve gems fused into one,

which became the center of the earth and the

center of the temple and has the name of the

Messiah engraved on it: the knowledge of

this made a man master of life and death; it is

the navel of the earth, the pillar which

becomes God’s house. 658 When Jacob went

to Bethel to behold the three degrees of glory659 and to receive the same ordinances that his father and grandfather had received

there, he built his altar of twelve stones;

then, according to Rabbi Eliezer, “Jacob

returned and found the stones turned into one

stone. … The Holy One placed his right foot

and sank the stone to the bottom of the

depths, and he made it the keystone of the

earth, just like a man who sets a keystone in

an arch; therefore it is called the foundation stone.” 660 As God sits in the heavens, the doctors report, there is before him the

archetype and model of the temple, “with the

Glory of God in the middle of it: a costly

stone on the altar having the name of the

Messiah engraved on it, and the stone was

supported by the Spirit of God.” 661 Compare this with the striking parallel in Moses 7:53:

“I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of

Heaven, which is broad as eternity.”

In the Book of Two Ways the initiate must draw a complex of creation figures on the

ground “with a special kind of stone. ”662

Among the Quraish was a tradition that there

were two jewels of paradise, the rukn

(support, foundation, elemental substance)

and the maqām, and that God extinguished

the light of them, which would otherwise

have completely outshone all other lights. 663

Another account tells how when God

proposed the creation, he ordered the angels,

“Build me forthwith, in a direct line

downward to the earth, a temple,” that

sinners may obtain mercy; then he gave

Adam a diamond of paradise, which at the

fall became the black stone.664 The diamond of Adam, which served as a cornerstone in

the first temple, and the emphasis on the four

gates of that temple665 present a striking analogy to a charm in a Twentieth-Dynasty

papyrus in which Seth as the evil serpent

“speaks against the four bricks of crystal,”

two of which were broken in certain year-

rites at Heliopolis.666 Likewise only the high priest could wear and operate the twelve

stones; he who “on his breast … wore the

oracle of God, as it is called, on which

twelve stones of different kinds were inset,

fastened together with gold. … On his head

he wore a tiara. … This creates such awe …

as to make one feel that one has come into

the presence of a man who belonged to a

different world.” 667 The important Coptic Codex Brucianus recalls that Adam is the

shining man and that the stone which is

identified with him is the diamond, “the

shining stone,” which became the

cornerstone of the temple. 668 The Muslims have a related tradition that says that at the

creation God gave to Adam a diamond of

paradise that turned black because of human

depravity and so became the famous Black

Stone of the Kaʿba.669 It was believed that the pectoral of the high priest in Israel had

been worn by Adam670 and that Adam himself was originally “transparent like

crystal” so that, “just as we see through the

air, so in the beginning Adam could see

through the earth”671—as if it were a great Urim and Thummim.

Once in a study entitled “Strange Ships

and Shining Stones,” we pointed out that the

sixteen glassy stones of the brother of

Jared’s handiwork would not shine in the

dark until the finger of the Lord had touched

them (Ether 3:4–6; 5:2–3); after that they

were luminous, the symbol of God’s

presence, since he had actually touched

them.672 Even so, the Urim and Thummim and the twelve stones “are a symbol of

God’s presence.” 673 It has commonly been held that Urim means nothing less than

light, 674 and the shining quality of the jewels

is constantly referred to: “The twelve shall shine in the judgment of the Urim and

Thummim. ”675 In the Mandaean initiation the Proven One says: “If it please Thee, Great

(Life), We will set up a pure Crystal … and

arcane (secret things) that are written within

it Shall be established, [and] … one by one

Will come into being. There will be a Pearl

that will enlighten darkened hearts.” 676 One is reminded that as Joseph Smith translated

the Book of Mormon by aid of the Urim and

Thummim, “in the darkness the spiritual light

would shine.” 677 The Urim and Thummim as well as the word zohar were often referred to as precious shining stones that led the

righteous safely in dark and dangerous

places. 678 The Stone of Truth gives light.

The Stone of Truth (Maat) in our text is

necessarily a shining stone, for “Maat seems

to signify ‘reality’ on one hand, and ‘light’ on

the other.…Light created all reality. Maat …

is this reality.” 679 The prehistoric symbol of Maat is the maat-stone, shaped like a chisel, that being the hieroglyph with which her

name is written; the stone was cut in a

special way and mounted in the walls of the

oldest temples to direct the rays of the sun

for ritual purposes. Thus, as Wolfhart

Westendorf informs us, Maat is, before all

else, the conveyor of light, especially the

sun’s light, to men in holy places.680

Theophrastus tells us that the king of Egypt

received a huge emerald ( smaragdon) from

the king of Babylon and that such a gem was

set “in the obelisk of Zeus” —that is, the

sun-stone, or bnbn, at Heliopolis, the

prehistoric center of solar worship in

Egypt. 681 The Egyptians, who saw in luminosity the very essence of divinity,

strove to achieve miraculous lighting effects

in ritual, covering sacred images with

“effluorescent salt of unusual composition”

to make them shine682 and making use of luminescent stones that would shine for a

while in the dark after being exposed to

sunlight. 683 Pliny says that they devised other means as well of capturing and conveying

the sun’s light, notably by the obelisk, a

static or solid solar ray between heaven and

earth. King Mespheres, who ruled at

Heliopolis, had a dream, according to Pliny,

in which he was commanded to build an

obelisk of light-conveying stone, and King

Sesothes followed his example. 684

The whole mystique of the shining stones

is reflected in early Mormon doctrine: “With

truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As

also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun,

and the power thereof by which it was made.

… The light which is in all things, which

giveth life to all things, which is the law by

which all things are governed” (D&C 88:7,

13).685 This last is what the Egyptians would

call Maat, she being the light-bringer who represents “the law by which all things are

governed.”

To match the Egyptian sun-stones, the

Hebrew eben ṯôbāh and the margālît (jewel or pearl) were two miraculous healing

stones (though some say they were one and

the same), which Abraham always wore

around his neck and which, upon his death,

God “attached … to the wheel of the sun” 686

so that the healing power now resides in the

sun’s rays. 687 A damaged passage from Qumran Cave 4 reads, “Its interpretation

concerns the twelve […] giving light in

accordance with the Urim and Thummim

[…] that are lacking from them like the sun

in all its light. ”688

Stone of Truth as a Stone of

Washing

In the Odes of Solomon, that ancient

Christian writing which presents so many striking points of resemblance to our Book of

Breathings, we see one standing on the Stone

of Truth while being washed, just at the

moment that the sun wakens to life;689 one then puts on a new garment of light, while the

Lord, who is “like the Sun[,] shines upon his

face. … My nostrils enjoyed the pleasant

odor of the Lord.” 690 Hence when the hymn singer of Qumran cries, “My feet are on the

rock, ”691 it may be the “rock of truth” on which the initiate is “established,” as in the

ode. There is no better known parallel to this

than the primal initiation of Adam and Eve,

who stood on special stones in the Jordan

and the Tigris, respectively, while the waters

washed over them during the night; they

emerged from their bath at sunrise. 692

Classical and even European literature is

full of parallels, such as Herakles’ being

initiated in the Alpheus and the well-known

Druid initiation; but it suffices here to show that the idea goes back as far as the

Egyptians. Cyril of Jerusalem describes the

Christian convert at the moment of his

baptism as fleeing “to the mountain, to Jesus

Christ, the stone cut without hands and filling

the whole world,” where the “cut stone

( tmēthenta lithon)” is the precious stone

( timēthena lithon).693

Green and White: Canonical

Colors

The Egyptian sacred stone is either white

or green or both. Most often it is green. 694

The candidate is named “Stone of Truth” as

he is cleansed or declared clean by Two

Ladies, having been just washed with water

by two others, Edjo and Nekhbet, both of

whom are represented by green plants

symbolic of the life that sustains the cosmos

itself. 695 Anyone entering an Egyptian temple

had to undergo ritual ablutions “in a shallow tank or bath,” or squatting or standing “upon

a stone pedestal.” Such a pedestal has been

found at Karnak (fig. 55); it bears an

inscription specifying that it was to be used

by priests to purify themselves before they

officiated in a temple. It was of alabaster,

and the inscription read: “Purification-

pedestal of alabaster of Ḥatnub, for the use

of the priests, that he may make an

‘endowment-with-life like Re forever.’” 696

Giuseppe Botti has pointed out that the Stone

of Truth in the Book of Breathings is

definitely connected with renewal by

washing and calls attention to a parallel

document in which the ceremonial foot

washing is done “in a silver basin on a

foundation of turquoise.” 697 A Greek visitor got the impression that “the Egyptians

worship … a foot-washing basin or stand

( podoniptra).” 698

Figure 55. This polished alabaster block supported the priests as they stood upon it to be washed and

anointed. Reconstruction. Temple at Karnak, ca. 1000

B.C.

Turquoise, being green, has the same life-

giving power as the lady Edjo, the Green

One. 699 “The green stone of Upper Egypt was snake-colored, the best of all stones of

the mountain. It is the papyrus because

nothing is better than papyrus.” If papyrus is

a water plant, its counterpart is the green

stone: “A green-stone amulette will not grow

in water, and a papyrus stalk will not grow

in the desert”; and, just as the papyrus is

compared with the green fruit of the persea

tree, the most valuable thing in Egypt, so the

green malachite of the desert represents the green grain fields that are the life of Egypt.

“Fair is (the word) green. … He says: The

stalk is nourishment and preserves all

mankind alive.” 700 The nmḥ=f-stone found on mummies must be both very hard and

green to symbolize “lush vegetation

encroaching on the red aridity of the desert,

as well as moral and physical stability.” 701

So the life-giving washing and the green

stone are tied in many ways. The ḫrp-

scepter, the supreme symbol of

administrative power in earthly affairs, was

originally of reed or papyrus and hence was

green. 702

“O Papyrus-plant which issued from

Wedjōyet [the Green One], you have gone

forth in the King, and the King has gone forth

in you, the King is powerful through your

strength.” 703 The marvelous Jalakānta stone of Hindu tradition was a shining stone that

enabled one to pass through the waters; it was a banded stone of green and white, and

when the stripes crossed, the stone was able

to protect against poison or the dangers of

any water crossing. 704 The migrating Horus, coming to Egypt for the first time, had such a

stone: “Bring me my eye,” he cries, referring

to a carnelian stone, “that it may open up the

waters, the ship-lady who opens up the

lakes.” 705 Likewise, the nmḥ=f-talisman of the Book of the Dead is a very hard green

stone which “is never overwhelmed in the

water.” 706 It was in the rites of the newborn sun that the red carnelian eye (the sun low on

the horizon) turned into the green faience

eye,707 for green symbolizes both the overcoming of “the red aridity of the desert”

by living verdure and the moral and physical

stability ( wȝḏ) of the world order;708 it represents the greening of the landscape after

the redness of the dawn. 709 The wounded red

eye of Horus, upon healing, becomes the proper wedjat-eye, the word meaning

perfect, sound, flourishing, and green after

rising from the waters. 710 As the oil of anointing makes “green,” 711 so in clothing

“the green bandlet … with its greenness, it

maketh perfect … it maketh green those who

are in its greenness, and one reneweth his

youth through it.” 712 While the garments of the light-seeking candidate are necessarily

pure white, the green absorbs the red,

leaving only white and green as the

canonical colors of the temple.

Sethe discovers in the First Dynasty a

ritual in which white was identified as the

Nationalfarbe, or state color, of the kingdom of Hierakonpolis in the south, while green

and red were the colors of Buto in the north;

yet the Red Crown, dšr.t, Sethe notes, is called wȝḏ.t, the Green One, in some

Pyramid Texts. 713 “I abhor red ( dšrw,

contention),” says a Coffin Text, 714 and another tells how the fiery red of conflict is

quenched, “red” and “anger” being the same

word ( dšrw), according to Zandee. 715 What came just before the Opening of the Mouth, it

will be recalled, was the washing and

anointing, for which one stood on a special

stone of green and white. The fabulous

pyrophilus stone was green and white, and

while it bore the name of “Firestone,” its

special function was to help its holder pass

safely through the waters. 716 The impressive background of this odd combination is found

in a great deal of folklore, noted by Giorgio

de Santillana and Hertha von Dechend, in

which, at the creation, a green fire under the

foundation stone in some way destroys all

impure elements.717 Rabbi Aqiba condemns the popular custom in Israel of crying,

“Water! Water! … whenever you find stones

of pure alabaster” (using the Egyptian word

šỉš for alabaster),718 the idea being that white alabaster is “the link between water

and earth.” 719 Green and white stones occur in a number of ritual texts, in which they

consistently serve (1) to identify the initiate

as a living and growing entity and (2) in

some way to combat heat or fire, exercising

peculiar power in both offices. 720

The Book of the Dead contains passages

identifying the green stone with the Stone of

Truth. Thus chapter 105 (one of those

included in the fragments of the Joseph Smith

Papyri—number IV) is very close to our

Breathings text as the dead person speaks:

“Homage to thee, my ka. In my lifetime ( or at my arising), behold, I have come to thee,

appearing in glory; a ba am I, endowed with power, initiated ( bs). I have brought to thee bd and snṯr that I may cleanse thy parts with them, thy limbs ( sn.t) being knit. Those evil things which I have said, those impure ( ʿbw)

things which I have done, there shall now be a recompense for them. For I am the green

stone wadj-amulet, the protector of the throat of Re, giving verdure to the inhabitants of the

horizon. As I am green, so they are green; as

my ka is green ( or flourishing), so they are green; my arising ( or lifetime) is green like them; the nourishment ( ḏfȝ.w, food offerings) of my ka is like theirs. He who is weighed in the balance, may his righteousness ascend to

the nose of Re in the day when my ka is

there.” 721

The green apotropaic amulet at the throat

of Re certainly suggests both the green-stone

Maat pendant, which every Egyptian judge

wore around his neck, and the thick cedar

wreath, which every Hopi kachina dancer

must wear for strength and protection.

In Book of the Dead 159, “a wadj-column

of green feldspar,” signifying that the wearer

“has taken possession of the magic power of

his father,” is placed on the neck of the subject “as a symbol of verdure and eternal

youth.” 722 An inscription on such a wadj-

column of green feldspar states that the

object shows that the wearer is without

physical defect and that the green feldspar is

that which never dries out ( swšr, sšr). 723 The strange and baffling rite in Book of the Dead

125, in which a green stone of glass and a

flaming torch are smashed, extinguished, and

buried, has been interpreted by Thausing, 724

Barguet, 725 and Mayassis. 726 What they are agreed on is that the rites represent the

renunciation of all earthly passions and

desires by the candidate, who thereby proves

himself to be an initiate of Osiris. 727 It is an act of consecration.

Locating the Duat (Dat)

Line 18: “Thou enterest into the duat ( dat, dwat) in a state of perfect purity ( lit. in

great[est] purification, or as purified greatly)”

Duat (or dat) is usually translated simply as underworld. “Although the texts differ in

regard to the position of the dȝ.t, ” writes Zandee, in the Pyramid Texts, “Dȝ.t and Nwn are a Sheol … , a dark subterranean realm of

the dead, where the inhabitants lead a

gloomy existence.” 728 But not always. The original meaning of dwȝ is “to worship in the morning,” and properly, “Duat is the morning

star, hence the starry heaven itself, only later

becoming the underworld.” 729 Selim Hassan suggests that it was at the end of the Sixth

Dynasty when the “Paradise of the royal

dead” in the sky was “brought down to the

Dwȝt for the delight of the followers of

Osiris” and that only later did the priests

develop the duat “into a veritable hell of fire and darkness”; 730 and it was not until the New Kingdom that “the original solar Dwȝt

has been placed in the underworld and regarded as a place of gloom in which Osiris

( Wsỉr) dwells.” 731

From the beginning, Egyptologists found

the Egyptian hereafter disturbingly divided

between heaven and hell. Even in the

Pyramid Texts, according to Speleers, “It is

not always possible to discern with certainty

whether certain terms apply particularly to

heaven, to earth, or to both at once.” 732 In the Amduat, the adversary of the god, Apophis,

is overcome “in the Dat, in this cavern,

although his place is in the sky.” 733 In the Berlin companion to our Book of Breathings,

while Horus “flies to heaven, earth, and the

underworld,” four parallel verses relate the

dead at the same time to heaven and the

underworld. 734 There might be a solution in the suggestion that “the Dwȝt was situated in the Heavens” and can be seen in the red

glow before sunrise, being that mysterious

region of transition just below and above the horizon.735 Thus in the Amduat the first hour of night is set in “the first fields of the Dat,”

and yet it is not in the underworld, but in a

desert which serves as a sort of “in-between

realm ( Zwischenreich).” 736

On the other hand, Hornung notes that,

according to the Amduat, the duat is located outside of both the funerary and celestial realms, in a region of outer darkness which

the sun never visits in his course, “a vast,

chaotic unreality with which the gods …

have nothing to do since dominion is

possible only in an ordered universe. ”737

Taking the opposite view from Hornung,

Bergman holds that the duat comprises all

that is inside the cartouche that represents what the sun encompasses in his journeying,

the cartouche itself being actually the symbol

of the duat. 738

The identification of the duat with the

necropolis is misleading because of the natural tendency to view the latter as the

most static of places, the end of all roads,

after which there is nothing to be done or

said. On the contrary, in all its contexts the

duat is, before all else, a place through which one journeys, following the example

of the sun, who enters and leaves it daily;739

even so, “the deceased, identifying himself

with the Sun-god, enters the Dwȝt paying

homage to Osiris ( Wsỉr) and at the same time lightening the darkness with his rays of light,

just as we see Rʿ in his Solar-boat.” 740

Following the example of the sun-god, the

king descends to the duat, not to remain, but to bring his light to each of the dark

chambers in turn, teach those who are there,

draw them to him, and conduct them out to

the light. 741 Of course, this irresistibly suggests the descensus motif of the early

Christian writings, with the bringing of a

great light “to them that sit in darkness”

(Luke 1:79).

A Series of Washings?

Line 18: “in a state of perfect (great) purity ( or as very pure; m wʿb wr, or with the great purification) with which the Two Maats have

washed thee in the great (main, broad) hall

( or court)” 742

Does this refer to a special ordinance, a

washing supreme among others?

Lines 19–20: “There has been performed for thee, yea, there has been performed for thee

a washing in the Hall ( or Court) of Geb; thy members have been purified in the Hall ( or

Court) of Shu”

The repetition seems to be intentional and

strengthens the impression that we have here

a rhetorical repetition, or parallelism for

emphasis, rather than reference to four

separate washings in four separate halls. 743

In the companion text to this, Book of the

Dead 125, the Hall of the Two Maats is,

appropriately, a law court in which the

candidate is cleared of all moral turpitude,

just as he is cleansed of all impurity. 744 Thus swʿb.tw=k is paralleled by smȝʿ-ḫrw,

meaning “declaring or recognizing the

candidate as justified or purified” rather than

indicating a repetition of ordinances. 745

The Hall of Geb and the Hall of

Shu (Creation Room)

Line 19: “the (broad) Hall of Geb”

The broad hall or court ( wsḫ.t) was, in

early times, a place where supreme legal

decisions were made.746 The possibility that there may have been two washings in Halls

of the Two Ladies and also in Halls of Geb

and Shu receives some support from the rites

adumbrated in Papyrus Salt 825, requiring four separate buildings, incarnations of Geb,

Nut, Isis, and Nephthys. 747 Since Isis and Nephthys are often identified with the Two

Maats, and since Nut is the wife and

counterpart of Shu, these houses—primitive

huts placed to the four quarters of the

compass—may well be our four washing

rooms. It was in the body of Nut (or his

father, Shu) that the candidate began his

career, emerging from “the womb of Nut” to

be received and washed, oiled, clothed, and

fed by the Two Ladies, Edjo and Nekhbet,

often identified in this capacity with Isis and

Nephthys. In the version of Papyrus Salt 825,

Isis and Nephthys have the office of

protecting the newly born initiate, 748 while Nut is “hidden in his [ sic] secrets” and Geb is “hidden in his form.” 749

Lines 19–20: “in the (broad) Hall ( or Court)

of Shu”

Shu, “clothed with the breath of life as

with a garment,” also belongs in the washing

room. 750 Shu takes us back another step beyond Geb in the nature of things. If Geb is

the earth in its very beginning, Shu is the

force that filled the immensity of space

before ever Geb was. It was Shu and Tefnut

of the skies who begot Geb and Nut, the

local earth and heaven.751 Before Geb

“crowded him out and replaced him,” 752 Shu was the proper “father of the gods” 753 and is represented as the oldest father of all, the

perfect primordial king (fig. 56). 754 Ombos, the oldest Egyptian shrine, was his; his father

fled there from his enemies, and there Shu

slew those enemies, taking the form of Horus

with the spear. 755 Thus Shu as Horus is, like Geb, the royal successor and transmitter of

kingship. 756 A temple inscription of Ramses

II designates Shu as the son of Re-Atum and

brother of the king, both being sons of Re;

Pharaoh, like Shu, exalts the heaven in a rite

carried out symbolically with the king

standing before Shu. The rite is called “the

holding-up of heaven” (see p. 338, fig.

105),757 for Shu, as the substance and support of the heavens, provides the ultimate

groundwork of all physical being—

everything necessarily begins with him.758 “I am Shu whom Atum-Re created. … I was not

formed in the womb, I was not composed in

the egg; I was not born of normal birth; …

my sister Tefnut … came forth from my

back” —this taking place while Shu was

asleep during Atum’s creative work. 759 The parallel with Eve’s appearance is obvious.

Figure 56. The god Geb, here shown twice in the center, acknowledges his son with a gesture of

paternal affection. Rollout drawing of a gold and lapis lazuli bracelet of Ahmose presented to his queen, Ah-hotep, ca. 1540 B.C. Courtesy of Cairo Museum.

Shu represents the mystery of space, which

cannot be empty since life passes through it.

He is the light- and life-conveying ether or

air that fills the space between heaven and

earth.760 His name is written with the symbol of the feather, šw, denoting both air and the rays of the sun, 761 both air and light being spiritual qualities. Thus we read, “I am Shu

born to Atum; clothed with the breath of life,

I go forth according to the word of Atum [the

feather also represents justice—Maat],

providing a wind on my ways. I make the

sky’s light after the darkness.” 762 The feather is the perfect embodiment of “the sweet and

refreshing breeze, the vibrant light scattering

the darkness” —hence, of life-giving light,

truth, and justice. When the king emerges from the chamber representing the duat, he comes like a wind, “bearing Maat with him”;

and as he comes, he sends out “an

explosion” of light as the son of Shu.763 In his complex but lucid capacity as god of air,

wind, breath, and light, Shu is designated in

our Breathings papyrus by the double symbol

of the feather and the downward radiating

solar disk, for he is called “the image of Re,

who sits in the inmost apple of his father’s

eye” (fig. 57)—in the midst of the solar disk,

of which he is the emanating light—hence,

also, “his name is Aton.” 764

Figure 57. Facsimile 2 in the Joseph Smith Papyri was designed to represent the pupil of an eye, ca. 170

B.C. © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

As the master of space, Shu is the

intermediary between the worlds: “O ye

eight Ḥḥ.w, … which Shu created, … tie the ladder of Atum (or Shu) to meet your Father

who is in me.” 765 This offers a nice problem of priority. The eight Ḥḥw were the Seekers ( ḥḥ), the eternal ones ( ḥḥ), “who embrace heaven in their arms; who hold together

heaven, the middle region ( ȝkr), and the

earth ( gb). Shu begot you. … I am the ba of Shu … who leaves heaven when I please and

go down to earth when I please, being met

and greeted by the gods” (fig. 58).766 In the archaic rites of Abydos, Shu is the one who

spans the space between heaven and earth. 767

All space was thought to come together at the

binding point of his temple, encircled by

eight tent shrines marking the major points of

the compass and facing the central shrine. 768

Since Shu is the self-shining light of the sky,

he accounts for the radiance of the sky after

sunset and before sunrise, which may be

caused by zodiacal light as well as

sunlight; 769 he makes “the hues of the sky which rise up, the wind at dawn,” all the

restless and spectacular changes in the

heavens before sunrise. 770 If it is Shu who gives the breath of life to his successor “by

the breath of his own mouth,” 771 it is also

“Shu, secreted in the disk,” whose solar

blasts destroy the wicked: “I am Shu who

makes ashes of your corpses” ;772 he is the destroying flame of lust, 773 but also the physical “flame, heating (illuminating) the

heaven, making light for the heavens,

illuminating Ḥḥ.w, lightning of the heavens!

Tie the ladder that I might ascend and reach

the repose of” the sons of Shu. “O he who

swallows the breath of the mouth of Shu,

blow forth the wind which is on the mouth of

Shu!” 774

The next clause may be a dependent

clause: “where you are about to see …

( ỉw=k ḥpr mȝ ȝ).” In view of the nature and

functions of Geb and Shu, it would seem that

the dramatization that follows, the creation

of man, takes place in the creation room—

the Hall of Geb and Shu.

Figure 58. The eight Ḥḥ.w gods, along with Shu, support the four legs of the heavenly cow,

representing the four corners of the world. The two solar boats float in the heavens among the stars on her belly. Redrawn from a photograph and drawings

of the golden shrine of Tutankhamun, ca. 1330 B.C.

Notes

1. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd rev. ed.

(Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1957), 230 §306.1.

2. Paul Barguet, Le Livre des Morts des anciens égyptiens

(Paris: Cerf, 1967), 18.

3. Jean-Claude Goyon, Le Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279

(Cairo: IFAO, 1966), 1–2.

4. László Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 98.

5. Wb 2:483.

6. Erik Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971), 87; English trans., Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many, trans. John Baines (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1982), 96.

7. Étienne Drioton and Jacques Vandier, L’Égypte: Dès origines à la conquête d’Alexandre (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1962), 101.

8. Joachim Spiegel, “Das Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” ASAE 53 (1956): 363, 365–67.

9. PT 215 §§143–49.

10. Walter Federn, “The ‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts: A New Approach,” JNES 19 (1960): 249.

11. Siegfried Morenz, “Das Problem des Werdens zu Osiris in der griechisch-römischen Zeit Ägyptens,” in REHR, 80–81.

12. Morenz, “Das Problem des Werdens,” 82–83.

13. Morenz, “Das Problem des Werdens,” 84–85.

14. Morenz, “Das Problem des Werdens,” 86–87.

15. Morenz, “Das Problem des Werdens,” 88.

16. Morenz, “Das Problem des Werdens,” 91.

17. Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen

Religion,” 98.

18. Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” 99.

19. Hermann Kees, Totenglauben und Jenseitsvorstellungen der alten Ägypter: Grundlagen und Entwicklung bis zum Ende des mittleren Reiches (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1926), 353.

20. Jaroslav Černý, Ancient Egyptian Religion (London: Hutchinson’s University Library, 1952), 104.

21. Alexandre Moret, Histoire de l’orient (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1929), 231.

22. Hugh W. Nibley, “A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price,” IE, July 1969, 97, 101–2.

23. Günther Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten (Jena: Diederichs, 1915), 185.

24. Claas J. Bleeker, “Isis and Nephthys as Wailing Women,” Numen 5 (1958): 16, punctuation altered.

25. W. Brede Kristensen, Het leven uit de dood: Studien over Egyptische en oud-Griekse godsdienst, 2nd ed.

(Haarlem: Bohn, 1949), 40–41, cited in Jan Zandee, Death as an Enemy: According to Ancient Egyptian Conceptions, trans. Mrs. W. F. Klasens (Leiden: Brill, 1960), 7.

26. BD 124, in E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, Scribe and Treasurer of the Temples of Egypt, About B.C. 1450 (New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1913), 2:520; 3: pl. 24.

27. Iamblichus, De mysteriis (Of the Mysteries) 6.6–7, in Theodor Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis

aegyptiacae (Bonn: Marcus and Weber, 1922), 500.

28. Adolf Erman, “Zum Namen des Osiris,” ZÄS 46 (1909): 95.

29. Alexandre Moret, Mystères égyptiens (Paris: Colin, 1913), 136; see discussion in Théodule Devéria,

“L’expression màâ-xerou, ” RT 1 (1870): 10–18,

reprinted in Mémoires et fragments, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 5 (Paris: Leroux, 1897), 2:281–95.

30. Raymond O. Faulkner, A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1962), 101.

31. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 50 §55.

32. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 18 n. 32.

33. Third biographical inscription of Inni, in Kurt Sethe, Urkunden der 18. Dynastie (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1906), 67.

34. Gertrud Thausing and Traudl Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch (Papyrus Reinisch) der Papyrussammlung der Österreichischen

Nationalbibliothek (Cairo: Österreichisches Kulturinstituts, 1969), 20.

35. Alexandre Moret, Le rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 164.

36. Reinhard Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1970), 39;

examples in Rudolf Anthes, “The Original Meaning of Mȝʿ ḪRW,” JNES 13 (1954): 21–51.

37. Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 43–

44; and Anthes, “Original Meaning of Mȝʿ ḪRW,” 21–

22.

38. Anthes, “Original Meaning of Mȝʿ ḪRW,” 50.

39. Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 30.

40. Alan H. Gardiner, “The Baptism of Pharaoh,” JEA 36

(1950): 3.

41. Iamblichus, Of the Mysteries 6.7, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 500.

42. Gustave Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes (Neuchâtel: Baconnière, 1946), 72; cf.

Eberhard Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1960), 2:10–11, 37–44

(scenes 2–3).

43. Černý, Ancient Egyptian Religion, 101.

44. Černý, Ancient Egyptian Religion, 102.

45. Herodotus, Histories 2.77; Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride (Of Isis and Osiris) 79; Theodor Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris (Prague: Orientalisches Institut, 1940–41), 2:285.

46. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:165.

47. Edfu Text, in Herbert W. Fairman, “A Scene of the Offering of Truth in the Temple of Edfu,” MDAIK 16

(1958): 89.

48. Aylward M. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” RT 39 (1921): 52, emphasis in original.

49. P. Leiden T 32 8/27, in Bruno H. Stricker, “De Egyptische mysteriën: Pap. Leiden T 32,” OMRO 37

(1956): 61.

50. Svein Bjerke, “Remarks on the Egyptian Ritual of

‘Opening the Mouth’ and Its Interpretation,” Numen 12

(1965): 211.

51. Hermann Junker, Die Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien nach den Inschriften von Dendera,

Edfu und Philae (Vienna: Hölder, 1910), 66; Wb 1:284.

52. Siegfried Schott, Die Reinigung Pharaos in einem memphitischen Tempel (Berlin P 13242) (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1957), 82.

53. Schott, Reinigung Pharaos, 69.

54. Jan Bergman, Ich bin Isis: Studien zum memphitischen Hintergrund der griechischen Isisaretalogien

(Uppsala: Berlingska, 1968), 115.

55. Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes, 75–76.

56. Gustave Jéquier, “L’équipage primitif de la barque solaire d’Héliopolis,” Egyptian Religion 3 (1935): 21.

57. Gardiner, “Baptism of Pharaoh,” 6.

58. Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes, 76–77.

59. Alexandre Piankoff, Le Livre du Jour et de la Nuit (Cairo: IFAO, 1942), 81.

60. George Nagel, “Un papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire (Louvre 3292 [inv.]),” BIFAO 29 (1929): 17.

61. PT 222 §208; 325 §533; 565 §1423; and 674 §1996, among others, cited in Louis Speleers, “La résurrection et la toilette du mort selon les Textes des Pyramides,”

RdE 3 (1938): 54–55.

62. François Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” ASAE 51 (1951): 400.

63. Friedrich Wilhelm Freiherrn von Bissing, Untersuchungen zu den Reliefs aus dem Re-

Heiligtum des Rathures (Munich: Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1922), 13–14.

64. Von Bissing, Untersuchungen zu den Reliefs, 15.

65. For purification, see Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 66–71; for hymns of jubilation, see Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 71–75, quotation on 71.

66. Erik Hornung, Das Amduat: Die Schrift des verborgenen Raumes (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1963–

67), 2:184.

67. Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes, 55.

68. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 72.

69. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 70–71.

70. Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du mort,” 37–67.

71. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 113–16.

72. Černý, Ancient Egyptian Religion, 102–3.

73. Aylward M. Blackman, “The Rite of Opening the Mouth in Ancient Egypt and Babylonia,” JEA 10 (1924): 59.

74. Winfried Barta, “Zur Frage des Zusammenhangs ramessidischer Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer in Karnak,” OLZ 66 (1971): 6.

75. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 66–69, quotation on 68–69.

76. P. Sensaos 12, in Bruno H. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” OMRO 23 (1942): 38.

77. P. Leiden T 32 8/5–6, in Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 37 (1956): 60.

78. Homer, Iliad 10.575–76; Homer, Odyssey 3.464–69; 4.48–51, 454–56; 10.360–73; 17.85–95; 23.153–65;

24.365–70.

79. Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes, 72–73.

80. Siegfried Morenz, “Zur Vergöttlichung in Ägypten,” ZÄS

84 (1959): 136.

81. Ernst Andersson-Akmar, “L’être pur: Celui qui est pur: Notice du mot neter, ” Sphinx 22 (1925): 1–5.

82. Wilhelm Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” ZÄS 76 (1940): 20.

83. Alexandre Piankoff, “Les deux papyrus ‘mythologiques’

de Her-Ouben au Musée du Caire,” ASAE 49 (1949): 131–32; cf. Alexandre Piankoff, Mythological Papyri (New York: Pantheon, 1957), 1:72, 2: pl. 1.

84. PT 452 §§841–42, in Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes, 55.

85. PT 524 §1233, in Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes, 56.

86. George Daressy, “Monuments d’Edfou datant du Moyen Empire,” ASAE 18 (1919): 50 n. 1.

87. See Hans Bonnet, Reallexikon der ägyptischen Religionsgeschichte, 2nd ed. (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971), 373.

88. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 536.

89. Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du mort,” 52.

90. François Daumas, “Les propylées du temple d’Hathor à Philae et le culte de la déesse,” ZÄS 95 (1968): 1.

91. E. A. E. Reymond, The Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1969), 65.

92. CT 61, in Adriaan de Buck, The Egyptian Coffin Texts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935–61), 1:256.

93. S. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne: Compléments à la religion égyptienne (Athens: BAOA, 1957), 529–30.

94. Henri Frankfort, The Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos (London: Egyptian Exploration Society, 1933), 2: pl. xlix.

95. Gertrud Thausing, Sein und Werden: Versuch einer Ganzheitsschau der Religion des Pharaonenreiches (Vienna: Stiglmayr, 1971), 28–38; S. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire de l’anté-diluvien à Sumer-Babylone: La familiarité divine originelle (Athens: BAOA, 1961), 400–405.

96. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 37.

97. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 82–

83.

98. Gustave Jéquier, Les frises d’objets des sarcophages du Moyen Empire (Cairo: IFAO, 1921), 305–18.

99. Hans O. Lange and Otto Neugebauer, Papyrus Carlsberg no. I: Ein hieratisch-demotischer

kosmologischer Text (Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1940), 49, 52.

100. Bernhard Grdselloff, “Nouvelles donnés concernant la tente de purification,” ASAE 51 (1951): 134.

101. Grdselloff, “Nouvelles donnés concernant la tente de purification,” 137.

102. Grdselloff, “Nouvelles donnés concernant la tente de purification,” 138.

103. PT 214 §§136–37, 138b.

104. Gardiner, “Baptism of Pharaoh,” 6; Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 18–19.

105. Claudia Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” Aegyptus 48 (1968): 12–13, referring to PT

510 §1140a and 536 §1293.

106. Albert de Rochas, “Les bénitiers à tirelire et à tourniquet dans les temples de l’ancienne Égypte,” ASAE

12 (1912): 95–96.

107. PT 471 §920–21, in Kurt Sethe, Übersetzung und Kommentar zu den altägyptischen Pyramidentexten (Hamburg: Augustin, 1962), 4:198–99.

108. P. Chester Beatty III 5/19, in Alan H. Gardiner, Hieratic Papyri in the British Museum: Third Series: Chester Beatty Gift (London: British Museum, 1935), 1:14.

109. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:165.

110. Erwin R. Goodenough, Jewish Symbols in the Greco-Roman Period (New York: Pantheon, 1953–68), 5:161.

111. Robert Graves, The Greek Myths (Baltimore: Penguin, 1955), 1:179–80.

112. Stith Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk-Literature, rev.

and enl. ed. (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1966), 2:185 (D1338.1), 319 (D1788), 412–13 (E80).

113. Gardiner, “Baptism of Pharaoh,” 3.

114. Wolfgang Helck, Die Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II. in Karnak (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1968), 1:6, 45, 66–67 (discussions of pictures 3, 40, and 60–61); 2:10, 29, 42.

115. Aylward M. Blackman, “Some Notes on the Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” JEA 5 (1918): 118.

116. Erika Schott, “Die heilige Vase des Amon,” ZÄS 98

(1970): 34–50.

117. Cited in Fred C. Collier, comp., The Teachings of President Brigham Young (Salt Lake City: Collier’s, 1987), 3:2.

118. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 48.

119. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 178.

120. CT 67, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:282–89.

121. Wb 3:412–13.

122. PT 518 §§1195–98; see Raymond O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969), 191.

123. Jonathan Z. Smith, “The Garments of Shame,” History of Religions 5 (1965–66): 224–33.

124. “The Life of Saints Eustathius and Theopiste and Their Two Children,” fol. 7a, in E. A. Wallis Budge, Coptic

Martyrdoms, etc., in the Dialect of Upper Egypt (1914; reprint, New York: AMS, 1977), 109.

125. Ethel S. Stevens (Drower), “The Cult-Hut or Mandi of the Mandaeans,” Ancient Egypt and the East, n.v.

(1934): 39–48.

126. Blackman, “Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” 117.

127. Blackman, “Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” 123.

128. Schott, Reinigung Pharaos, 66.

129. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of Opening the Mouth (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1909), 1:187–90, 244.

130. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 69–

71, quotation on 70–71.

131. Blackman, “Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” 118.

132. Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 11.

133. Alfred Lucas, “The Use of Natron by the Ancient Egyptians in Mummification,” JEA 1 (1914): 120; Alfred Lucas, “The Occurrence of Natron in Ancient Egypt,”

JEA 18 (1932): 62–66.

134. Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du mort,” 59.

135. Robert O. Steuer, Über das wohlriechende Natron bei den alten Ägyptern: Interpretation, Darstellung und Kultur des ṣnṯr (Leiden: Brill, 1937), 28–29, 34.

136. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 69–

71.

137. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 82.

138. Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 11.

139. PT 34 §§26–27, in Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 8.

140. PT 36 §29a, in Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 8–9, 11.

141. Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 8–9.

142. Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 7.

143. PT 423 §765b, in Morenz, “Zur Vergöttlichung in Ägypten,” 139.

144. PT 510 §1140a–c; 536 §1293b–d, in Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 12–13.

145. BD 17, in Budge, Book of the Dead, Papyrus of Ani, 3: pl. 8.

146. PT 463 §877a, in Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 17.

147. Aylward M. Blackman, “The Significance of Incense and Libations in Funerary and Temple Ritual,” ZÄS 50

(1912): 69–75.

148. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

17.

149. Blackman, “Significance of Incense and Libations,” 75.

150. Blackman, “Significance of Incense and Libations,” 69–

75.

151. Alfred Wiedemann, Das alte Ägypten (Heidelberg: Winter, 1920), 154.

152. Max Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos: Ein Beitrag zur ägyptischen

Religions- und Literaturgeschichte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929), 51.

153. Wiedemann, Das alte Ägypten, 154.

154. Wiedemann, Das alte Ägypten, 154–55.

155. Jéquier, Frises d’objets des sarcophages, 319–22.

156. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 79.

157. Wiedemann, Das alte Ägypten, 154–55.

158. Wiedemann, Das alte Ägypten, 154–55; see Dolzani,

“Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 6.

159. Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 18.

160. P. Salt 825 17/4–6, in Philippe Derchain, Le Papyrus Salt 825 (B.M. 10051): Rituel pour la conservation de la vie en Égypte (Brussels: Palais des Académies, 1965), 2:18*.

161. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 366–

67.

162. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:51.

163. Hans Bonnet, “Die Bedeutung der Räucherungen in ägyptischen Kult,” ZÄS 67 (1931): 27.

164. Wiedemann, Das alte Ägypten, 152–55.

165. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:52.

166. Bonnet, “Bedeutung der Räucherungen,” 27.

167. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 72.

168. Blackman, “Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” 118–20; Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 286.

169. Schott, Reinigung Pharaos, 65.

170. Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 8–10,

quotation from 10; cf. PT 35 §27.

171. Aylward M. Blackman, “The House of the Morning,”

JEA 5 (1918): 157.

172. Blackman, “House of the Morning,” 157; and Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:56 (discussion of picture 49); 2:35.

173. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 46.

174. Iamblichus, Of the Mysteries 3.9.

175. Alexandre Piankoff, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon (New York: Pantheon, 1955), 32–33.

176. Hans Schack-Schackenburg, Das Buch von den zwei Wegen des seligen Toten (Zweiwegebuch): Texte aus der Pyramidenzeit nach einem im Berliner Museum bewahrten Sargboden des Mittleren Reiches (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1903), 7.

177. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 356–

57.

178. Oliver R. Gurney, “Hittite Kingship,” in Myth, Ritual, and Kingship: Essays on the Theory and Practice of Kingship in the Ancient Near East and in Israel, ed.

Samuel H. Hooke (Oxford: Clarendon, 1958), 118.

179. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 196.

180. Bjerke, “Remarks on the Egyptian Ritual of ‘Opening the Mouth,’” 211.

181. Edouard Naville, “Le discours d’Horus à Osiris,” ZÄS

13 (1875): 91, cited in Moret, Rituel du culte divin

journalier en Égypte, 197.

182. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire, 381.

183. Alan H. Gardiner, The Temple of King Sethos I at Abydos (London: Egyptian Exploration Society, 1933–

58), 1: pl. 6. Anointing is a frequent theme in vol. 3.

184. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:18–19 (discussion of pictures 14–15); 2:16.

185. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:22 (discussion of pictures 18 and 19); 2:18.

186. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:23 (discussion of picture 19); 2:18.

187. Alan H. Gardiner, “The Coronation of King Ḥaremḥab,” JEA 39 (1953): 19 nn.

188. Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zu altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Der dramatische

Ramesseumpapyrus: Ein Spiel zur Thronbesteigung des Königs (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928), 239, commenting on P. Ramesseum B 134c.

189. Wb 1:280–85.

190. PT 418 §742, in Sethe, Übersetzung und Kommentar zu den altägyptischen Pyramidentexten, 3:377.

191. Philippe Derchain, “La couronne de la justification: Essai d’analyse d’un rite ptolémaïque,” CdE 30 (1955): 249.

192. Gardiner, “Coronation of King Ḥaremḥab,” 26–27.

193. Aylward M. Blackman, “A Study of the Liturgy Celebrated in the Temple of the Aton, at El-Amarna,” in Recueil d’études égyptologiques: Dédiées à la

mémoire de Jean-François Champollion (Paris: Champion, 1922), 516.

194. Konrad Hoffmann, Die theophoren Personennamen des älteren Ägyptens (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1915), 2.

195. P. Ramesseum B 130–35, in Sethe, Der dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus, 236–40.

196. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 2:59, 58–59.

197. P. Leiden T 32 1/31, in Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 56; cf. François R.

Herbin, Le livre de parcourir l’eternite (Leuven: Peeters, 1994), 117.

198. Life of Adam and Eve 42:2, 4, in APOT 2:144; cf. OTP

2:274 n. 42a.

199. Descensus ad infernos 20.2, in J. Rendel Harris, The Odes and Psalms of Solomon (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1909), 123; Gospel of Nicodemus 13:1–13; 14:2–4.

200. Ignatius, Epistle to the Ephesians 17.1.

201. On the Egyptian concept of sin, see below, third paragraph of commentary, part 6, p. 371.

202. On the Opening of the Mouth ceremony, see below, pp.

164–82.

203. Henri Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods: A Study of Ancient Near Eastern Religion as the Integration of Society and Nature (Chicago: University of Chicago

Press, 1948), 154, discussing PT 556 §1382.

204. Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du mort,” 37.

205. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 48.

206. Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca (Library) 1.92.

207. PT 222 §208, in Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 370.

208. Hartwig Altenmüller, “‘Messersee,’ ‘gewundener Wasserlauf,’ und ‘Flammensee,’” ZÄS 92 (1966): 86–91, 95.

209. Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du mort,” 54–55.

210. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 380.

211. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 380–

81.

212. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 383.

213. CT 26, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:78.

214. Daumas, “Propylées du temple d’Hathor,” 1.

215. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 213.

216. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 68–70.

217. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 382.

218. CT 163, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:405.

219. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 383–

84.

220. BD 17, in Hermann Grapow, Das 17. Kapitel des ägyptischen Totenbuches und seine

religionsgeschichtliche Bedeutung (Berlin: Paul, 1912), 7.

221. Gerardus van der Leeuw, “Das neuentdeckte Osirisheiligtum in Abydos und das sogenannte

Natatorium der Villa Adriana,” Archiv für

Religionswissenschaft 19 (1916–19): 544–46.

222. Schott, Reinigung Pharaos, 73–74.

223. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 59, 67; Junker, Stundenwachen in den

Osirismysterien, 66.

224. Jan Zandee, review of Ägyptische Religion, by Siegfried Morenz, BiOr 19 (1962): 39.

225. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 154–55; English trans., 160–61.

226. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 72–73; cf. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 82.

227. Blackman, “Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” 118; Aylward M. Blackman, “Lustrations and the Heliopolitan Sun-Cult,” PSBA 40 (1918): 57–60; and Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 72–73.

228. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 69.

229. Francis Ll. Griffith, “Herodotus II.90: Apotheosis by Drowning,” ZÄS 46 (1909): 132–34; Friedrich Wilhelm von Bissing, “Apotheosis by Drowning,” RT 34 (1912): 37–38; Hermann Kees, “Apotheosis by Drowning,” in

Studies Presented to F. Ll. Griffith, ed. S. R. K.

Glanville (London: Egypt Exploration Society and Oxford University Press, 1932), 402–5.

230. Émile Chassinat, “La mise à mort rituelle d’Apis,” RT

38 (1916–17): 60.

231. Shabako stone 62–63, in Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zur altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Das

“Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der

Schabakostein des Britischen Museums (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928) , 72–73.

232. Chassinat, “La mise à mort rituelle d’Apis,” 50–60.

233. Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes, 75.

234. Van der Leeuw, “Neuentdeckte Osirisheiligtum in Abydos,” 545.

235. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 36.

236. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 127 n. 5.

237. Zandee, Death as an Enemy, 171–72, quotation on 171.

238. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 379.

239. Werner Vycichl, “Der Feuerstrom im Jenseits,” Archiv für ägyptische Archäologie 1 (1938): 263–64.

240. Alexandre Piankoff, “The Sky-Goddess Nut and the Night Journey of the Sun,” JEA 20 (1934): 59.

241. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 359–

60.

242. CT 62, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:271.

243. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 379.

244. Alexander Scharff and Anton Moortgat, Ägypten und Vorderasien im Altertum (Munich: Bruckmann, 1950), 56.

245. Eugène Revillout, “Amasis sur le lac et le conte du nautonnier,” Revue égyptologique 12 (1907): 113–20.

246. Schott, Reinigung Pharaos, 66–67; Blackman,

“Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 56.

247. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:25–26.

248. Elizabeth Thomas, “Solar Barks Prow to Prow,” JEA 42 (1956): 79 n. 3.

249. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:20.

250. Sethe, Dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus, 96.

251. Émile Chassinat, “Le livre de protéger la barque divine,” RT 16 (1894): 115.

252. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 70; English trans., 77–79.

253. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 28–30.

254. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 239.

255. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:19; Pierre Montet, Les scènes de la vie privée dans les tombeaux égyptiens de l’Ancien Empire (Strasbourg: Librairie Istra, 1925), 5–8.

256. Zandee, Death as an Enemy, 112.

257. Montet, Scènes de la vie privée, 6.

258. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:19, cf. 170.

259. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 498, sign-list O49.

260. Zandee, Death as an Enemy, 113.

261. Victor Loret, “Le champ des Souchets,” RT 13 (1890): 199.

262. Zandee, Death as an Enemy, 112–13.

263. Hermann Kees, “Die Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” ZÄS 78 (1942): 44.

264. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 99, discussing BD 110.

265. Piankoff, Livre du Jour et de la Nuit, 20–21.

266. CT 159, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:368–72.

267. Pieper, Grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos, 12–13, 29.

268. CT 173, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:55.

269. Eugène Lefébure, “Le paradis égyptien,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 36 (Paris: Leroux, 1915), 3:305.

270. Eberhard Otto, “Sprüche auf altägyptischen Särgen,”

ZDMG 102 (1952): 192.

271. P. Sȩkowski 4/7–8, in Albertyna Szczudłowska,

“Pyramid Texts Preserved on Sȩkowski Papyrus,” ZÄS

99 (1972): 26–27.

272. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:19.

273. J. S. Lewis, “Oh, I Had Such a Pretty Dream, Mamma,” in Deseret Sunday School Songs (Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday School Union, 1909), 184.

274. Geo Widengren, The Gnostic Attitude (Santa Barbara: Institute of Religious Studies, 1973), 24–25.

275. Amduat, sixth through twelfth hours, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:97, 117, 134, 153, 159, 167, 179, 192; 2:141, 153, 161, 174, 184; Short Amduat, second hour, line 19; third hour, line 47; fourth hour, line 75; eighth hour, line 195; ninth hour, line 213; tenth hour, line 233; eleventh hour, line 250; twelfth hour, line 270, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:3, 5, 7, 17, 19, 21–22, 24, 27–29, 32–35.

276. Short Amduat, eleventh hour, line 254, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:23.

277. Cited in Edouard Naville, “La destruction des hommes par les dieux: D’après une inscription mythologique du tombeau de Séti I, à Thèbes,” Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archaeology 4 (1875): 12–13.

278. Siegfried Schott, Das schöne Fest vom Wüstentale: Festbräuche einer Totenstadt (Wiesbaden: Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur in Mainz, 1952), 771 (7).

279. Wilhelm Czermak, “Vom grossen Gedanken Ägyptens,”

Archiv für ägyptische Archäologie 1 (1938): 208.

280. Piankoff, Livre du Jour et de la Nuit, 88.

281. Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes, 67–68.

282. Zandee, Death as an Enemy, 113.

283. Cf. Kees, “Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” 49.

284. P. Sȩkowski 23/7 and P. Schmitt 3.1.32, in Albertyna Szczudłowska, “Liturgical Text Preserved on Sȩkowski Papyrus,” ZÄS 98 (1970): 62–63 and n. 20.

285. CT 61, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:256–61.

286. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 99 , discussing BD 110.

287. CT 173, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:52–55.

288. Pierre de Labriolle, “Refrigerium,” Bulletin d’ancienne littérature et d’archéologie chrétiennes 2

(1912): 214–19.

289. TB Berakot 54b (11.1).

290. Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 103.

291. BD 125, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 37.

292. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 37 n. 7.

293. Ludwig Keimer, “Pendeloques en forme d’insectes faisant partie de colliers égyptiens,” ASAE 33 (1933): 97–118.

294. Keimer, “Pendeloques en forme d’insectes,” ASAE 32

(1932): pl. xi, 1.

295. Keimer, “Pendeloques en forme d’insectes,” ASAE 33

(1933): 107–14.

296. Étienne Drioton, “Contributions à l’étude du chapitre CXXV du Livre des Morts: Les confessions negatives,”

in Recueil d’études égyptologiques: Dédiées à la mémoire de Jean-François Champollion (Paris: Champion, 1922), 545, cited in Keimer, “Pendeloques en forme d’insectes,” ASAE 33 (1933): 112.

297. PT 467 §891d, in Keimer, “Pendeloques en forme d’insectes,” ASAE 33 (1933): 114.

298. Keimer, “Pendeloques en forme d’insectes,” ASAE 33

(1933): 112.

299. Keimer, “Pendeloques en forme d’insectes,” ASAE 33

(1933): 114.

300. Clement of Alexandria, Cohortatio ad gentes (Encouragement to the Nations) 1, in PG 8:52–53.

301. Walter F. Otto, Die Musen und der göttliche Ursprung des Singens und Sagens, 3rd ed.

(Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1961), 61.

302. Plato, Phaedrus 262D.

303. August F. von Pauly and George Wissowa, Paulys Realencyclopädie der classischen

Altertumswissenschaft, 2nd ser. (Stuttgart: Metzler, 1893–1978), 5.1:1116–17.

304. Clement of Alexandria, Encouragement to the Nations 1, in PG 8:52–53.

305. Pauly and Wissowa, Realencyclopädie, 2nd ser., 5.1:1114.

306. Homer, Hymn to Aphrodite 218–38; cf. Pauly and Wissowa, Realencyclopädie, 2nd ser. 6.2:1513–14, 1518.

307. Hans Kalmus, cited in Lyall Watson, Supernature (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor, 1963), 18–19; Pauly and Wissowa, Realencyclopädie, 2nd ser., 5.1:1115, 1117–

18.

308. Pauly and Wissowa, Realencyclopädie, 2nd ser., 5.1:1111.

309. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 113, 140, discussing BD 76, 104, respectively.

310. Suzanne Ratié, review of Catalogue of Egyptian Antiquities in the British Museum I: Mummies and Human Remains, by Warren R. Dawson and P. H. K.

Gray, BiOr 26 (1969): 191.

311. Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 53–55, quotation on 53; 54

fig. 18, from the tomb of Seti I, shows a praying mantis instead of a grasshopper; see Hugh W. Nibley, Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:622 fig. 103.

312. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 755.

313. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 753–54.

314. Rudolf Anthes, “König ‘Schlange,’ ḏt-Schlange und Schlangengöttin Uto,” ZÄS 83 (1958): 79–82.

315. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 138 n. 4.

316. Alan H. Gardiner, “Horus the Beḥdetite,” JEA 30

(1944): 59; cf. Elmer G. Suhr, “The Sphinx,” Folklore 81

(1970): 101–2; and Raymond O. Faulkner, “The

Pregnancy of Isis,” JEA 54 (1968): 40–42.

317. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 854.

318. PT 683 §§2047–48; cf. Wilhelm Spiegelberg and Kurt Sethe, “Das Grundwort zum Lautzeichen ḏ, ” ZÄS 55

(1918): 89.

319. Aylward M. Blackman, “The King of Egypt’s Grace before Meat,” JEA 31 (1945): 60.

320. Jacques J. Clère, “Un hymne à Abydos sur une stèle inédite d’époque Ramesside,” ZÄS 84 (1959): 94–95.

321. Hermann Kees, Farbensymbolik in ägyptischen religiösen Texten (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1943), 429.

322. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 140 n. 4.

323. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 32 n. 1, and 476, sign-list I13.

324. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 141.

325. Four-Hundred-Year Stela 9, in Kurt Sethe, “Der Denkstein mit dem Datum des Jahres 400 der Ära von Tanis,” ZÄS 65 (1930): 85, 87; Günther Roeder, “Das Ichneumon in der ägyptischen Religion und Kunst,”

Egyptian Religion 4 (1936): 37.

326. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 854.

327. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:20.

328. PT 438 §810, in Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:91.

329. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:91; Bonnet, Reallexikon, 853.

330. Lange and Neugebauer, Papyrus Carlsberg No. I, 20–

21.

331. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 853.

332. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 507.

333. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 508.

334. Herman te Velde, “Some Remarks on the Structure of Egyptian Divine Triads,” JEA 57 (1971): 84–86.

335. Georges Legrain, Les temples de Karnak (Brussels: Vromant, 1929), 242 and fig. 148.

336. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 87.

337. Joachim Spiegel, Das Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1971), 13.

338. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 82.

339. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 2:88–89; cf. PT

269 §§379–81.

340. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 508.

341. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:95.

342. P. Bremner-Rhind 6/14–28, in Raymond O. Faulkner, The Papyrus Bremner-Rhind (British Museum No.

10188) (Brussels: FERE, 1933), 11–12.

343. P. Bremner-Rhind 6/27–7/12, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 12–13.

344. Gardiner, “Baptism of Pharaoh,” 7; cf. P. Bremner-Rhind 5/25–27, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 10: “Your sister Isis washes you and embraces you.”

345. Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du mort,” 62–67.

346. Gertrud Thausing, “Der ägyptische Schicksalsbegriff,”

MDAIK 8 (1939): 65.

347. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 139 n. 4, 141.

348. Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 10–

11.

349. G. Elliot Smith, The Evolution of the Dragon (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1919), 183;

cf. Martin H. Ninck, Die Bedeuting des Wassers im Kult und Leben der Alten: Eine symbolgeschichtliche Untersuchung (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1960), 10.

350. Raymond O. Faulkner, “The Bremner-Rhind Papyrus—

I,” JEA 22 (1936): 122; P. Bremner-Rhind 1/2–5, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 1.

351. Anthes, “König ‘Schlange,’” 81–82.

352. Macrobius, Saturnalia 1.18.10.

353. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34 (1953): 15.

354. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34 (1953): 14–15; and Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 37

(1956): 49–52.

355. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:27; Bonnet, Reallexikon, 515.

356. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34 (1953): 13–14.

357. Sophocles, Oedipus at Colonus 1586–608.

358. E.g., Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:148–95; 2:130–209.

359. Hermann Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” RT 36 (1914): 12.

360. P. Louvre N. 3284 lines 36–37.

361. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:41.

362. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:39–41.

363. Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 30.

364. Gaston Maspero, “Le Livre des Morts,” in Études de mythologie et d’archéologie égyptiennes, ed. Gaston

Maspero, BE 1 (Paris: Leroux, 1893), 350–52; cf. 310–

11 for illustrations.

365. Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du mort,” 46–49.

366. Bjerke, “Remarks on the Egyptian Ritual of ‘Opening the Mouth,’” 215.

367. Jules Baillet, “Contribution à l’histoire des origines de la momification,” RT 22 (1900): 185, 187–96.

368. Alfred Hermann, “Zergliedern und Zusammenfügen: Religionsgeschichtliches zur Mumifizierung,” Numen 3

(1956): 81–96.

369. George Foucart, “Sur un des livres du rituel funéraire,”

Sphinx 14 (1910–11): 94, 107–9.

370. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:1–2.

371. Bjerke, “Remarks on the Egyptian Ritual of ‘Opening the Mouth,’” 205.

372. George Foucart, review of The Book of the Dead, by E. A. Wallis Budge, Sphinx 14 (1910–11): 55.

373. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 5–7, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 31–35.

374. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 13–14, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 32–36.

375. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 43–44, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 47–50.

376. Tomb of Petosiris 62–77, in Gustave Lefebvre, “Textes du tombeau de Petosiris,” ASAE 20 (1920): 230.

377. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 65–66.

378. Blackman, “Rite of Opening the Mouth,” 59. For the Babylonian version, see Gerhard Meier, “Die Ritualtafel

der Serie ‘Mundwaschung,’” AfO 12 (1937–39): 44.

379. D. J. Hoens, “Initiation in Later Hinduism according to Tantric Texts,” in Initiation, ed. Claas J. Bleeker (Leiden: Brill, 1965), 74–80.

380. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:16; Siegfried Morenz, Ägyptische Religion (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1960), 163–64.

381. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:1–2, 5.

382. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:l.

383. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:7.

384. Bjerke, “Remarks on the Egyptian Ritual of ‘Opening the Mouth,’” 206.

385. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:53; see also Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 34 n. 5.

386. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:67.

387. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:8.

388. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:3.

389. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 48.

390. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 1:2; 2:34

(scene 1), 36.

391. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:56. See Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:13–14; Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 48.

392. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:61–62.

393. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:148–54.

394. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:91.

395. Blackman, “Rite of Opening the Mouth,” 55.

396. Eberhard Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue seit dem neuen Reich,” Or 17 (1948): 454–55, 461–62.

397. Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 30.

398. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:7.

399. Blackman, “Rite of Opening the Mouth,” 49, 58–59; Meier, “Ritualtafel der Serie ‘Mundwaschung,’” 40–45; for India, see Hoens, “Initiation in Later Hinduism,” 74–

75, 80.

400. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 357.

401. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 358; PT 213–16 §§134–51.

402. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 409; PT 302–6 §§458–81.

403. See Walter Wreszinski, Atlas zur altägyptischen Kulturgeschichte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1923–36), 1.2:127, 131.

404. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:5–7.

405. Blackman, “Rite of Opening the Mouth,” 58.

406. Erich Ebeling, Tod und Leben nach den Vorstellungen der Babylonier (Leipzig: de Gruyter, 1931), 100.

407. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:105–6.

408. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 2:188.

409. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 1:133; 2:120 (scene 55).

410. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 40;

Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 78.

411. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:122.

412. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:232–33.

413. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:124–26

(scene 55A).

414. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:124.

415. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 2:54.

416. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 2:56.

417. Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 30.

418. Maspero, “Livre des Morts,” 350–51.

419. Blackman, “Rite of Opening the Mouth,” 52–53.

420. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:119.

421. Grapow, Das 17. Kapitel des ägyptischen Totenbuches, 32–34, commenting on BD 17.17.

422. Rudolf Anthes, “Mythologie und der gesunde Menschenverstand im alten Ägypten,” Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft zu Berlin 96 (1966): 31.

423. Maxence de Rochemonteix, “Le temple d’Apet où est engendré l’Osiris thébain,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed.

Gaston Maspero, BE 3 (Paris: Leroux, 1894), 268.

424. P. Sȩkowski 12/3–5, in Szczudłowska, “Liturgical Text Preserved on Sȩkowski Papyrus,” 55.

425. P. Sensaos 7–8, in Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,”

37.

426. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 166–67, in Constantin E.

Sander-Hansen, Die religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre (Copenhagen: Levin and

Munksgaard, 1937), 68.

427. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 62–63, in Sander-Hansen, Die religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der

Anchnesneferibre, 33.

428. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 93–96, in Sander-Hansen, Die religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der

Anchnesneferibre, 48.

429. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 77–78, in Sander-Hansen, Die religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der

Anchnesneferibre, 41.

430. KUB 29.1.2.17–38, in Benjamin Schwartz, “A Hittite Ritual Text (KUB 29.1 = 1780/c),” Or 16 (1947): 31.

431. A. Leo Oppenheim, “Mesopotamian Mythology II,” Or 17 (1948): 56.

432. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:60–63

(scene 12).

433. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 1:34; 2:63

(scene 13).

434. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:66–67.

435. Diodorus, Library 1.91.4.

436. Lucian, De sacrificiis (On Sacrifice) 15.

437. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:156–57.

438. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 2:15–17.

439. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:41–45.

440. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:47–48.

441. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:47–49.

442. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 509, sign-list S42.

443. P. Westcar 8/12–25, in Adolf Erman, The Ancient

Egyptians: A Sourcebook of Their Writings, trans.

Aylward M. Blackman (New York: Harper and Row,

1966), 42.

444. Constantin E. Sander-Hansen, Die Texte der Metternichstele (Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1956), 56–

58, lines 138–62.

445. Warren R. Dawson, “Notes on Egyptian Magic,”

Aegyptus 11 (1930–31): 23–28.

446. CT 106, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:117.

447. Erich Ebeling, “Eine Beschwörung der Gattung Ušburruda,” Or 22 (1953): 358–61.

448. Maurus Witzel, “Ninchursag und Enki (Ein Dilmun-Mythus),” Or 15 (1946): 241.

449. Kurt Sethe, Die Sprüche für das Kennen der heiligen Orte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1925), 2.

450. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:39–40.

451. T. J. Colin Baly, citing Moret in “Notes on the Ritual of Opening the Mouth,” JEA 16 (1930): 173.

452. Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 42–45.

453. CT 132, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:153–54.

454. Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” 21, citing BD 1 (1.III.4 in Czermak’s numbering).

455. Georg Steindorff, “Ein koptischer Grabstein,” ZÄS 38

(1900): 59–61.

456. Life of Adam and Eve 34:1, in APOT 2:142; cf. OTP

2:272.

457. Apocalypse of Moses 8:2, in APOT 2:142; cf. OTP

2:273.

458. A. Löwy, “Old Jewish Legends on Biblical Topics: II.—

Legendary Description of Hell,” PSBA 10 (1887–88): 337–38, quotation on 338.

459. Apocalypse of Moses 9:3, in APOT 2:143; cf. OTP

2:273.

460. Life of Adam and Eve 40:1, in APOT 2:144 and OTP

2:274. When Noah prayed to God to relieve his posterity from the terrible physical afflictions visited upon them by the demons, the angel Raphael came from heaven and instructed him in the use of herbs and the healing art, which brought general relief but left the power of death in the hands of Mastema, the destroyer. Adolph Jellinek, ed., Bet ha-Midrash (Jerusalem: Wahrmann, 1967), 3:155–60.

461. Life of Adam and Eve 40:1–43:3, in APOT 2:144–45; cf. OTP 2:274 and n. 42a.

462. Clementine recognitiones (Clementine Recognitions) 1.45, in PG 1:1233.

463. 3 Baruch 15:1–2.

464. Ignatius Ephraem II Rahmani, Testamentum domini nostri Jesus Christi (Mainz: Kirchheim, 1899), 128.

465. 1 Jeu chap. 32, p. 35, in Carl Schmidt, ed., Gnostische Schriften in koptischer Sprache aus dem Codex

Brucianus (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1892), 79.

466. Gospel of Philip II, 3, 77–78, in James M. Robinson, The Nag Hammadi Library in English (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1977), 146–47 (1988 ed., 155); Bentley

Layton, The Gnostic Scriptures: A New Translation with Annotations and Introductions (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1987), 348–49.

467. François S. J. Bourassa, “La grâce sacramentelle et l’onction des malades,” Sciences ecclésiastiques 19

(1967): 33–47.

468. André Wilmart and Eugène Tisserant, “Fragments grecs et latins de l’Évangile de Barthélemy,” Revue biblique, n.s., 10 (1913): 356.

469. Book of the Resurrection of Christ by Bartholomew the Apostle, fol. 3b, in E. A. Wallis Budge, Coptic Apocrypha in the Dialect of Upper Egypt (1913; reprint, New York: AMS, 1977), 6, 184.

470. Cf. Matthew 9:2–6; cf. Johannes Hempel, Heilung als Symbol und Wirklichkeit im biblischen Schrifttum (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1958), 237–314.

471. Psalm of Thomas 18:15–18; 19:22–26 , in C. R. C.

Allberry, A Manichaean Psalm-Book (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1938), 2:225.

472. Odes of Solomon 15:3–9, in OTP 2:748.

473. Mark Lidzbarski, Ginzā der Schatz oder das grosse Buch der Mandäer (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1925), 23, 434, 510.

474. S. Krauss, “Note sur le nom divin de vingt-deux lettres et sur le démon de l’oubli,” Revue des études juives 56

(1908): 254.

475. CT 62, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:265.

476. Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des

ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” 21.

477. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis 20: Mystagogica 2.3–

5, in PG 33:1080–81.

478. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis 20: Mystagogica 3.4, in PG 33:1092.

479. Polycarp, Epistola ad Philippenses (Epistle to the Philippians) 1, in PG 5:1005, emphasis added.

480. Ebeling, “Eine Beschwörung der Gattung Ušburruda,”

358–61.

481. Ignatius, Epistola ad Ephesios (Epistle to the Ephesians) 17, in PG 5:657.

482. Gospel of Philip II, 77, 35–78:10, in Robinson, Nag Hammadi Library in English, 146–47 (1988 ed., 155); Layton, Gnostic Scriptures, 348–49.

483. Clementine Recognitions 4.35, in PG 1:1330.

484. Cyprian, Epistola (Epistle) 56, in PL 4:365.

485. Book of the Resurrection of Christ by Barnabas the Apostle, fol. 4a, in Budge, Coptic Apocrypha, 7, 185; cf. Acts 1:18, in which he suffers one of the classic blows of death.

486. P. Salt 825 4/4, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:4*.

487. PT 215 §§141–43.

488. Gustave Lefebvre, “Un conte égyptien: Vérité et Mensonge,” RdE 4 (1940): 17, 19–21.

489. E.g., Life of Adam and Eve 34:1, in PO 4:354; APOT

2:142; and OTP 2:272, where they apply to both Abel and Adam; and 1 Enoch 69:4–8, in APOT 2:233 and OTP 1:47–48.

490. Testament of Abraham 19; cf. K. Kohler, “The Pre-Talmudic Haggada, II,” JQR, o.s., 7 (1894–95): 590.

491. Discourse on Abbatôn by Timothy, Archbishop of Alexandria, fol. 14a–b, in Budge, Coptic Martyrdoms, 235.

492. Dawson, “Notes on Egyptian Magic,” 23.

493. 2 Enoch 30:8–9; cf. APOT 2:449; OTP 1:150.

494. Testament of Reuben 2, in OTP 1:782.

495. Testament of Reuben 3, in OTP 1:783.

496. PT 23–78 §§16–54, in Alexandre Piankoff, The Pyramid of Unas (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968), pls. 58–63; Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 23

and n. 2.

497. Heinrich K. Brugsch, “Das Osiris-Mysterium von Tentyra,” ZÄS 19 (1881): 98–100.

498. Firmicus Maternus, De errore profanarum religionum (The Error of the Pagan Religions) 8.2, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 520.

499. CT 87, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:53.

500. CT 87, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:54.

501. CT 85, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:51.

502. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

46.

503. Life of Adam and Eve 40–43, in APOT 2:144 and OTP

2:274.

504. S. A. Horodezky, “Michael und Gabriel,”

Monatsschrift für Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums 72 (1928): 505.

505. PT 213 §135; cf. CT 62, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:266.

506. PT 539 §§1303–15.

507. Cited in Bjerke, “Remarks on the Egyptian Ritual of

‘Opening the Mouth,’” 213.

508. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:156–57.

509. Edouard Naville, “La plante magique de Noferatum,”

Revue de l’Égypte ancienne 1 (1925): 34–35.

510. Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” 15.

511. Piankoff, Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, 126; Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:185.

512. Sirach 17:6.

513. Constitutiones apostolicae (Apostolic Constitutions) 7.38, in PG 1:1037.

514. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 45–46.

515. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 1:14; 2:48

(scene 5).

516. Ebeling, Tod und Leben, 114–15.

517. Shabako stone 56–57, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 59–61.

518. Ebeling, Tod und Leben, 101.

519. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 81.

520. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:81, 83–

84; cf. J. Gwyn Griffiths, “Remarks on the Mythology of the Eyes of Horus,” CdE 33 (1958): 182–93.

521. Wolfgang Helck, “Die Herkunft des abydenischen

Osirisrituals,” ArOr 20 (1952): 77–78.

522. Alexandre Moret, Kings and Gods of Egypt (New York: Putnam, 1912), 88.

523. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:20.

524. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 72.

525. Gaston Maspero, “Le rituel du sacrifice funéraire,” in Études de mythologie et d’archéologie égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 1 (Paris: Leroux, 1893), 310–

11; Théodule Devéria, “Le fer et l’aimant: Leur nom et leur usage dans l’ancienne Égypte,” in Mémoires et fragments, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 5 (Paris: Leroux, 1897), 2:339–56.

526. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:80–81

(scene 26).

527. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:97

(scene 37); PT 37 §30a.

528. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 162–63

(scene 72B).

529. Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 30.

530. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 2:15–16, 22–25.

531. Moret, Histoire de l’orient, 1:232.

532. Gerald A. Wainwright, “Letopolis,” JEA 18 (1932): 163.

533. Cf. Marc Philonenko, “La cosmogome du ‘Livre des secrets d’Hénoch,’” in REHR, 114–16.

534. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 13.

535. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 52, emphasis in original.

536. Siegfried Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 21; cf. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und

‘dbȝ.t,’” 13–14.

537. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 66.

538. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 71–

78.

539. See Ms. B3Bo version of CT 36, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:144.

540. CT 36, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:144.

541. CT 35, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:129–31.

542. CT 35, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:132.

543. CT 35, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:133.

544. Maxence de Rochemonteix, “Temple d’Apet où est engendré l’Osiris de Thèbes,” RT 3 (1881): 83; “Le Temple d’Apet où est engendré l’Osiris thébain,” in Oeuvres diverses, 192.

545. Rochemonteix, “Le Temple d’Apet où est engendré l’Osiris thébain,” 192; Czermak, “Vom grossen

Gedanken Ägyptens,” 208–9.

546. P. Leiden T 32 1/19–20, in Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 55–56.

547. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 229.

548. P. Sensaos 4–5, in Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,”

37.

549. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:79.

550. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer

Ramses’ II., 1:77.

551. Émile Chassinat, “Le Livre Second des Respirations,”

RHR 31 (1895): 318; P. BM 19109, cited in Jens Lieblein, Le livre égyptien Que Mon Nom Fleurisse (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1895), iv, 5–6.

552. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 31.

553. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 32 n. 3.

554. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 7–8; Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 14.

555. Grdseloff, “Nouvelles données concernant la tente de purification,” 134.

556. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 5.

557. Blackman, “Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” 123–24.

558. BD 125, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 39.

559. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, October 1969, 85–87.

560. Pierre Gilbert, “Autour du pylône de Khonsou,” CdE 23

(1948): 21.

561. Gilbert, “Autour du pylone de Khonsou,” 20–21.

562. Gilbert, “Autour du pylone de Khonsou,” 20.

563. Dieter Müller, “I Am Isis,” review of Ich bin Isis, by Jan Bergman, OLZ 67 (1972): 122.

564. See Müller, “I Am Isis,” 123.

565. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:9, 2:17.

566. Pierre Montet, “Trois gouverneurs de Tanis d’après les

inscriptions des statues 687, 689 et 700 du Caire,” Kêmi 7 (1938): 144–47.

567. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 431.

568. Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes, 145–46.

569. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 432–33.

570. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 433.

571. Claas J. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals: Enactments of Religious Renewal (Leiden: Brill, 1967), 6–7.

572. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 432.

573. Cf. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:341; 3: pl. 1.

574. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 5–6, quotation on 6.

575. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 13.

576. Kurt Sethe, “Die Türteile bnš und ʿrj.t, ” ZÄS 67

(1931): 115.

577. P. Leiden T 32 1/19, in Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 60.

578. Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 72.

579. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 31 n. 6.

580. Thausing, “Der ägyptische Schicksalsbegriff,” 52 n.

581. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 433–34.

582. James H. Breasted, Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt (New York: Scribner’s Sons, 1912), 299 n. 2.

583. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 181 n. 1; see excursus on

Egyptian polarity, in Eberhard Otto, Gott und Mensch nach den ägyptischen Tempelinschriften der

griechisch-römischen Zeit: Eine Untersuchungen zur Phraseologie der Tempelinschriften (Heidelberg: Winter, 1964), 91–94.

584. Patrick Boylan, Thoth: The Hermes of Egypt (London: Oxford University Press, 1922), 54 n. 1.

585. Giovanni Capovilla, “Aegyptiaca: Contributo all’espansione culturale dell’Egitto antico,” Aegyptus 38

(1958): 88; Barguet, Livre des Morts, 100, discussing BD 125.

586. Hermann Grapow, “Ägyptische Jenseitswünsche in Sprüchen ungewöhnlicher Fassung aus dem Neuen

Reich,” ZÄS 77 (1942): 76; Wolfhart Westendorf, “Maat, die Führerin des Sonnenlichtes, in der Architektur,” ZÄS

97 (1971): 143–46.

587. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:56.

588. PT 539 §1315a; 627 §1785b, in Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 199 n. 3.

589. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:19; 2:17.

590. Rudolf Anthes, “Das Sonnenauge in den Pyramidentexten,” ZÄS 86 (1961): 1.

591. Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 90.

592. Thausing, “Der ägyptische Schicksalsbegriff,” 64.

593. PT 260 §317a–b, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:17; Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 89–90.

594. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 181 n. 1.

595. Te Velde, “Remarks on the Structure of Egyptian Divine Triads,” 84.

596. Zohar, Bereshith 50b, in Harry Sperling and Maurice Simon, The Zohar (London: Soncino, 1984), 1:160–61.

597. CT 171, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:41–45.

598. CT 171, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:45.

599. University of Chicago Oriental Institute Epigraphic Survey, Festival Scenes of Ramses III, Medinet Habu 4

(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1940), pls. 197–

99.

600. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:77.

601. CT 37, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:147.

602. CT 35, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:131–33.

603. Czermak, “Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen

‘Totenbuches,’” 20.

604. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 5.

605. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 7–8, 10–12.

606. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 11–12.

607. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 216.

608. Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 44.

609. BD 125, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 36.

610. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 21–22, 100–101.

611. Wb 3:247.

612. Pierre Montet, “Le fruit défendu,” Kêmi 11 (1950): 115.

613. Marcel Simon, “Souillure morale et souillure rituelle dans le christianisme primitif,” Studi e materiali di storia delle religioni 38 (1967): 511.

614. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 52, emphasis in original.

615. Hugh W. Nibley, “Sparsiones,” Classical Journal 40

(1945): 515–43, reprinted in The Ancient State: The Rulers and the Ruled, CWHN 10:148–94; and Hugh W.

Nibley, “The Arrow, the Hunter, and the State,” Western Political Quarterly 2 (1949): 328–44, reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN 10:1–32.

616. T. J. Colin Baly, “The Ritual Significance of the Funerary Objects,” in The Bucheum, ed. Robert Mond and Oliver H. Myers (London: Egypt Exploration

Society, 1934), 1:133.

617. PT 540 §§1329–30, in Kurt Sethe, Die altägyptische Pyramidentexte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1908–10), 2:237.

618. Heinrich Schützinger, Ursprung und Entwicklung der arabischen Abraham-Nimrod-Legende (Bonn:

Selbstverlag des Orientalischen Seminars der Universität Bonn, 1961), 143.

619. Bernard Chapira, “Légendes bibliques attribuées à Ka’b el-Ahbar,” Revue des études juives 69 (1919): 95

n. 3; TB Soṯah 11b (I, viii).

620. Chapira, “Légendes bibliques attribuées à Ka’b el-Ahbar,” 95 and n. 3.

621. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 16.

622. J. Massingberd Ford, “The Jewel of Discernment: A

Study of Stone Symbolism,” Biblische Zeitschrift 11

(1967): 109–16; and J. Massingberd Ford, “Thou Art

‘Abraham’ and upon This Rock … ,” Heythrop Journal 6 (1965): 289–301.

623. David Flusser, “Qumran und die Zwölf,” in Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 136–38.

624. Zohar, Lech Lecha 83b–84a, in Sperling and Simon, Zohar, 1:279–80 [ endowed is their term—eds.].

625. Odes of Solomon 11:5.

626. Odes of Solomon 9:8–12; cf. Revelation 2:17: “To him that overcometh will I give … a white stone.”

627. Pirqe Rabbi Eliezer, 38 (34b).

628. Shepherd of Hermas, Visio (Visions) 3.5–6, in PG

2:903–4.

629. The Teaching of Apa Psote, the Great Bishop of Psoi, fol. 3b, in E. A. Wallis Budge, Miscellaneous Coptic Texts in the Dialect of Upper Egypt (1915; reprint, New York: AMS, 1977), 727.

630. Évangile de Saint Barthélemy, frg. 2, in PO 2:190.

631. Ford, “Jewel of Discernment,” 109.

632. Flusser, “Qumran und die Zwölf,” 138–43.

633. Évangile des douze apôtres, frg. 2, in PO 2:147.

634. Donald W. Riddle, “The Cephas-Peter Problem, and a Possible Solution,” JBL 59 (1940): 178.

635. Vacher Burch, “The ‘Stone’ and the ‘Keys’ (Mt.

16:18ff.),” JBL 52 (1933): 148–49.

636. Burch, “The ‘Stone’ and the ‘Keys,’” 150.

637. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Baptism for the Dead in Ancient

Times,” parts 1–5, IE, December 1948, 786–88, 836–38; January 1949, 24–26, 60; February 1949, 90–91, 109–10, 112; March 1949, 146–48, 180–83; April 1949, 212–14, all reprinted in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:100–167.

638. Apocalypse of Adam 85:10–14; cf. Douglas M.

Parrott, Nag Hammadi Codices V, 2–5 and VI with Papyrus Berolinensis 8502, 1 and 4 (Leiden: Brill, 1979), 192; Robinson, Nag Hammadi Library in

English, 264 (1988 ed., 286); cf. OTP 1:719; Layton, Gnostic Scriptures, 64.

639. Ford, “Jewel of Discernment,” 114.

640. Ford, “Jewel of Discernment,” 112.

641. Geo Widengren, The Ascension of the Apostle and the Heavenly Book (Uppsala: Lundequistska, 1950), 27.

642. Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1937–66), 3:172.

643. Zadokite Fragments (CD) XIII, 4; 1QS VI, 16; IX, 7; V, 3.

644. Sirach 33:3.

645. Phineas Mordell, “The Origin of Letters and Numerals according to the Sefer Yeṣirah,” JQR 2 (1911–12): 580.

646. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 91.

647. Gustav Weil, Biblische Legenden der Muselmänner: Aus arabischen Quellen zusammengetragen und mit jüdischen Sagen verglichen (Frankfurt am Main: Literarischen Anstalt, 1845), 171, 175–76; English

translation in Gustav Weil, The Bible, the Koran, and the Talmud; or, Biblical Legends of the Mussulmans (New York: Harper, 1846), 200.

648. Bernhard Beer, Leben Abraham’s nach Auffassung der jüdischen Sage (Leipzig: Leiner, 1859), 193.

649. Ginzberg, Legends of the Jews, 1:292.

650. Geo Widengren, “Early Hebrew Myths and Their Interpretation,” in Myth, Ritual, and Kingship, ed.

Hooke, 166–67.

651. Josef Scharbert, review of Ephod und Choschen im Lichte des Alten Orients, by Ingolf Friedrich, AfO 23

(1970): 117.

652. József Deér, “Der Globus des spätrömischen und des byzantinischen Kaisers: Symbole oder Insigne?”

Byzantinische Zeitschrift 54 (1961): 309.

653. Edwin E. Le Bas, “Was the Corner-Stone of Scripture a Pyramidion?” Palestine Exploration Quarterly 78

(1946): 103–15.

654. Cf. Ford, “Jewel of Discernment,” 115.

655. Flusser, “Qumran und die Zwölf,” 136–38.

656. Ford, “Jewel of Discernment,” 114–15.

657. Robert Eisler, Iēsous basileus ou basileusas (Heidelberg: Winter, 1929–30), 2:287.

658. Pirqe Rabbi Eliezer 35 (31a); Ginzberg, Legends of the Jews, 1:352; 5:292.

659. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp.

Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938), 305.

660. Pirqe Rabbi Eliezer 35 (31a); cf. Ginzberg, Legends of the Jews, 1:352; 5:292.

661. Micha Josef bin Gorion, Die Sagen der Juden (Frankfurt am Main: Rütten and Loening, 1913–27),

1:35.

662. Schack-Schackenburg, Das Buch von den zwei Wegen des seligen Toten ( Zweiwegebuch), 8.

663. Thaʿlabi, Qiṣaṣ al-Anbiyāʾ (Cairo: Mustāfā al Bābi al-Halabi wa-Awlāduhu, a.h. 1345), 58, end.

664. Weil, Biblische Legenden, 61–62; trans., 82–83.

665. Weil, Biblische Legenden, 21–22; trans., 20.

666. P. Louvre N. 3239 10–12, in Émile Chassinat, “Les papyrus magiques 3237 et 3239 du Louvre,” RT 14

(1893): 14–15.

667. Letter of Aristeias, 97–99.

668. Untitled Text of the Bruce Codex, ch. 3, in Schmidt, The Books of Jeu and the Untitled Text, 230–31; cf.

Weil, Biblische Legenden, 21–22; trans., 20–21.

669. Weil, Biblische Legenden, 37; trans., 41–42.

670. Widengren, “Early Hebrew Myths and Their Interpretation,” 167; cf. Ezekiel 28:13–14; Exodus 28:17–20.

671. Jakob Böhme, Le nouveau ciel et la nouvelle terre, 46, 51, in Ernst Schering, “Adam und die Schlange,”

Zeitschrift für Religions- und Geistesgeschichte 10

(1958): 100.

672. Hugh W. Nibley, “Strange Ships and Shining Stones (A Not So Fantastic Story),” in A Book of Mormon

Treasury (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1959), 144, reprinted in An Approach to the Book of Mormon, CWHN 6:351–52.

673. J. Schoneveld, “Urim en Tummim,” in Orientalia Neerlandica: A Volume of Oriental Studies (Leiden: Sijthoff’s Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V., 1948), 222.

674. Schoneveld, “Urim en Tummim,” 222; Ford, “Jewel of Discernment,” 112.

675. Flusser, “Qumran und die Zwölf,” 145.

676. Ethel S. Drower, trans. and ed., The Canonical Prayerbook of the Mandaeans (Leiden: Brill, 1959) , 209 no. 252.

677. B. H. Roberts, in Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:128.

678. See Nibley, “Strange Ships and Shining Stones,” in CWHN 6:348–49, 357–58.

679. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 150.

680. Westendorf, “Maat, die Führerin des Sonnenlichtes,”

143–46.

681. Theophrastus, De lapidibus (On Stones) 4, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegypticae, 56.

682. Alfred Lucas, “Efflorescent Salt of Unusual Composition,” ASAE 17 (1917): 86–88.

683. Pliny, Natural History 36.7.58, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegypticae, 197.

684. Pliny, Natural History 37.8.64–65, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegypticae, 197.

685. Cf. Truman Madsen, “Man Illumined,” in To the Glory of God: Mormon Essays on Great Issues, ed. Truman G. Madsen and Charles D. Tate Jr. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), 121–33.

686. Ginzberg, Legends of the Jews, 1:292.

687. Beer, Leben Abraham’s, 193–94.

688. 4Q164 4–6; John M. Allegro, Qumrân Cave 4: I(4Q158–4Q186) (Oxford: Clarendon, 1968), 27–28.

689. Odes of Solomon 11:5; 9:8.

690. Odes of Solomon 11:10–15.

691. 1QHa XII, 3.

692. Life of Adam and Eve 6:1–8:3, in APOT 2:135 and OTP 2:258–60.

693. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis 19: Mystagogica 1.8, in PG 33:1073 .

694. Michel Malaise, “La pierre nmḥf et son identification avec le défunt dans le Livre des Morts,” CdE 48 (1973): 33–34.

695. Ulrich Wilcken, “Die Bedeutung der ägyptischen Pflanzensäulen,” ZÄS 39 (1901): 66–70; and August Köster, “Zur ägyptischen Pflanzensäule,” ZÄS 39 (1901): 138–43; Ludwig Borchardt, “Die Cyperussäule,” ZÄS 40

(1902–3): 36–49.

696. Blackman, “Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” 121.

697. Giuseppe Botti, “Il Libro del Respirare e un suo nuovo esemplare nel Papiro demotico n.766 del Museo Egizio di Torino,” JEA 54 (1968): 227, 230.

698. Theophilus, Ad Autolycum (To Autolycus) 1.10, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 361

(also in PG 6:1040).

699. Victor Loret, “La turquoise chez les anciens égyptiens,”

Kêmi 1 (1928): 99–114.

700. The Eye of Re (Leiden Demotic Papyrus I 384 6/28–

30), in Wilhelm Spiegelberg, Der ägyptische Mythus vom Sonnenauge (der Papyrus der Tierfabeln

—“Kufi” ) nach dem Leidener demotischen Papyrus I 384 (Strassburg: Schultz, 1917), 23.

701. Malaise, “Pierre nmḥf et son identification,” 34.

702. Walter B. Emery, “Preliminary Report on the Excavations at North Saqqâra, 1969–70,” JEA 57

(1971): pl. 10 no. 2.

703. PT 662 §1875, in Faulkner, Concise Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 272.

704. Wilhelm Printz, “Gilgamesch und Alexander,” ZDMG

85 (1931): 200.

705. P. Ramesseum B 2, in Sethe, Dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus, 103.

706. Malaise, “Pierre nmḥf et son identification,” 30, quoting Budge.

707. See Kurt Sethe, “Menes und die Gründung von Memphis,” in Beiträge zur ältesten Geschichte

Ägyptens (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1905), 126.

708. Malaise, “Pierre nmḥf et son identification,” 34.

709. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 91 n. 5.

710. Winfried Barta, “Der Königsring als Symbol zyklischer

Wiederkehr,” ZÄS 98 (1970): 15.

711. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:232, 234.

712. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:230–31; cf.

Labib Habachi, “Edjo, Mistress of Nebt,” ZÄS 90 (1963): 48.

713. Sethe, “Menes und die Gründung von Memphis,” 126.

714. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:392–93.

715. CT 7, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:21, in Jan Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 49, 56; cf. Friedrich von Duhn, “Rot und Tot,” Archiv für Religionswissenschaft 9 (1906): 1–24.

716. Nibley, “Strange Ships and Shining Stones,” in CWHN

6:353.

717. Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill: An Essay on Myth and the Frame of Time (Boston: Gambit, 1969), 391.

718. Hans-Friedrich Weiss, Untersuchungen zur Kosmologie des hellenistischen und palästinischen Judentums (Berlin: Deutsche Akademie der

Wissenschaften, 1966), 100, incorrectly citing TB

Ḥagigah 15b. The correct citation is TB Ḥagigah 14b (II, i), in Goldschmidt, Babylonische Talmud, 3:833.

719. TY Ḥagigah 77a (II, i), in Weiss, Untersuchungen zur Kosmologie, 100.

720. So PT 301 §§455–57; 350 §567; 352 §569; 404 §702.

721. BD 105, in JSP IV.

722. BD 159, in Barguet, Livre des Morts, 226 and n. l.

723. BD 160, in Barguet, Livre des Morts, 227.

724. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 37–40.

725. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 163–64.

726. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 60–65, 457.

727. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 163 n. 52.

728. Zandee, Death as an Enemy, 10.

729. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:166.

730. Selim Bey Hassan, The Solar Boats of Khafra, vol. 6, part 1, of Excavations at Gîza (Cairo: Government Press, 1946), 299.

731. Hassan, The Solar Boats of Khafra, 306.

732. Louis Speleers, Les Textes des Pyramides égyptiennes (Brussels: Vanderpoorten, 1923–24), 2:236.

733. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:118; 2:125.

734. Metternich Stela, 225, and Vatican Stela No. 128a, lines 6–8, in Walter Wreszinski, “Das Buch vom

Durchwandeln der Ewigkeit nach einer Stele im

Vatikan,” ZÄS 45 (1908–9): 116–17.

735. Hassan, Solar Boats of Khafra, 288.

736. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:40.

737. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:8.

738. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 157–58 n. 2.

739. PT 483 §§1014–19; 461 §§871–73.

740. Hassan, Solar Boats of Khafra, 306.

741. E.g., Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:24–26.

742. Cf. Klaus Baer, “The Breathing Permit of Hôr: A Translation of the Apparent Source of the Book of

Abraham,” Dialogue 3/3 (1968): 121.

743. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 8–9.

744. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 32.

745. Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 39.

746. Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 106.

747. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:102–8, 174.

748. P. Salt 825 9/1, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:11*.

749. P. Salt 825 8/9–9/1, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:11*.

750. Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” 50.

751. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 686; Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:134.

752. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 687.

753. P. Salt 825 14/9–10, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:16*.

754. Naos Ismaïlia 2248 lines 1–3, in Georges Goyon, “Les travaux de Chou et les tribulations de Geb d’après le Naos 2248 d’Ismaïlia,” Kêmi 6 (1936): 7, 21; CT 79, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:25.

755. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:121.

756. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 688.

757. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:31 (discussion of picture 27); 2:22.

758. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 685–86; CT 76, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:5.

759. CT 76, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:3–4.

760. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 685; Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” 62–63.

761. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 288.

762. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:29–30.

763. Paul Barguet, review of The Pyramid of Unas: Texts Translated with Commentary, by Alexandre Piankoff, RHR 177 (1970): 68.

764. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 686.

765. CT 76, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:1.

766. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:27–29; see Nibley, Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:471 fig. 80, for the placement in the tomb.

767. Kurt Sethe, Zur altägyptischen Sage vom Sonnenauge das in der Fremde war (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1912), 26.

768. Naos Ismaïlia 2248 lines 6–10, in G. Goyon, “Travaux de Chou et les tribulations de Geb,” 8–9, 22–23.

769. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:30.

770. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:30–31.

771. P. Salt 825 14/9–10, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:16*.

772. P. Salt 825 8/4–5, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:10*–11*.

773. CT 77, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:18.

774. CT 76, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:11–12.

Commentary, Part 3

The Creation (Resurrection) of

Man

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 20–

22

20 (1/20). … Thou art about to behold Re

in his coming down, Atum in the evening;

Amon is at thy side, bestowing upon thee

21. breath (of life), while Ptah forms thy

body (members). Thou enterest ( or that thou mayest enter) the horizon in

company with Re; they receive ( or that they may receive) thy ba

22. into the nšm.t-bark along with Osiris.

They deify (sanctify, exalt) thy ba in the House ( or Hall) of Geb; thou art justified for time and eternity.

Commentary: Dramatic

Presentations in the Temple

Line 20: “Thou art about to behold ( or herewith you behold, next you see) Re in his

coming down” 1

All preparations being in order, the

candidate proceeds to another room, the

“‘House of Gold,’ i.e., the sarcophagus

chamber” 2 (the Hall of Geb and Shu—i.e., the creation room); the show, so to speak, is

about to begin (fig. 59; see color plate 6). It

is an abrupt change of subject; the washing

and anointing, about which so much fuss has

been made up to this point, are not mentioned

again. The transfer from one setting or room

to another during the rites could, however,

“be carried out merely in a symbolic way

( ein Ortswechsel also nur symbolisch

vorgenommen) . ” 3

Figure 59. The subject greets Ptah, the Creator, with rejoicing (“expansion of heart”). JSP IV (BD 106). ©

Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

According to Joachim Spiegel, the first

half of the rites celebrated in the pyramid of

Unas presenting “the mythical process” of

the resurrection took the form of a complete

dramatic presentation ( vollständig

dramatisch) in the manner of a “mystery

play,” with stage, props, and actors (see p.

119, fig. 30).4 The Osiris drama was “a mixture of dogmas, enigmas, and mysteries,”

as Plutarch found it, or doctrines, symbols,

and drama requiring a special interpreter. 5

But it was a real drama. The first of “the four

cultic principles,” as Claas Bleeker sees

them, is dramatic presentation, the other three being the mythic-ritual material

presented, the magical tenor of the thing, and

the prevailing mood of mystery.6 Though the illusion of the otherworldly and of passing

from one state to another could be effected

by dreams and drugs, 7 still, form and discipline are essential to cult; and if the

initiates are all to follow faithfully in the true path, they should all experience the same

things. The initiate is invited to ponder ta

deiknymena kai dromena (what is both

explained and acted out in the temple). 8 For the Egyptian, nature itself was a stage for the

self-dramatizing life of Horus.9 In the mysteries, priests become actors.10

“Egyptian ritual texts,” according to Dieter

Müller, “abound in … ‘functional’ self-

predication” —that is, in speeches in which

a deity introduces himself or herself as an

actor in a play. 11

Thus the formula “I am Thoth” means, according to Siegfried Schott, that the speech

that follows is spoken by one playing the

role of Thoth in a ritual drama—usually the

lector-priest, for which reason one is

justified in seeing in the Egyptian “art of the

lector-priest” the art of acting.12 Wolfgang Helck points out that even the ancient

Ramesseum drama, though performed on the

eve of the sed-festival, which required a

funeral, was not a real royal funeral, but only

a dramatized one.13 The Egyptian text carved on the Shabako stone is the story of the

creation, a drama in which certain key

scenes were presented by actors, while the

story as a whole was recited and explained

to the temple audience by a lector-priest or,

as Kurt Sethe frankly designates him,

Theaterdirektor. 14 According to Iamblichus, the message of the Egyptian mysteries was

conveyed by a mixture of mimes and

symbols in which one thing could represent another; 15 the lessons are neither spoken outright, he says, nor concealed, but are

indicated by signs and tokens. 16 Any means of conveying the message was acceptable, if

duly modest and effective; statues and even

puppets were useful. 17 If a statue could represent the deceased, “perhaps a priest sat

down to partake vicariously of the food”

brought to the statue itself. 18 Cyril of Jerusalem, in the beginning of his Lectures

on Mysteries, maintains that “seeing is much better than hearing for these things, … to take

you out of this perplexity ( peira) and lead you to the brighter and more fragrant

meadows of this paradise.” 19

“A ‘coherent account of creation’ is

lacking” in Egyptian because what happened

was described “not in a dogma but in cultic

forms,” which are “narrative by nature and

… completely void of any contemplative

tendencies.” 20 It is straight narrative that is being told in these dramatic presentations,

often containing more reality than symbol.

The temple drama is not a dramatized myth,

but the other way round—myth is a later

attempt to explain a drama, the literal content

of which was no longer understood;21 it is a

“literary treatment” of “divine history.” 22 It all began, supposedly, not with speculation

but with real happenings. The rites and

stories are for nothing more remarkable than

the absolute lack of invention and creativity

they reveal; once the story was told in the

beginning, “no one ever claims to produce

anything really new.” 23

According to Hellmut Brunner, “creation

stories are a focal point of Egyptian

religious literature, … the very spring of life

( Lebensquell) of pharaonic Egypt.” 24 Even in “the dramatic presentation at the tomb,”

the deceased appears as Horus receiving his

kingdom from “Atum, father of the gods,” in the heavenly council at the creation.25 In telling how things begin, the Egyptians take

liberties with the characters and props and

episodes of the play, but they never invent

new ones; and if it is “permissible to equate

individual elements ( Glieder) by swapping

one for the other, ”26 it is because they are familiar and readily recognized—no one is

fooled by the taking of such liberties.

Creation of the Earth and Creation

of Man

In our short Book of Breathings version, it

is the creation of man that receives the

emphasis. The creation of the earth itself—

the main theme of the Shabako stone—

receives more attention in the longer

Breathings text Leiden T 32, with references

to the council in heaven and the planning of

the creation. The prologue in heaven is

treated in the latter as a spectacle viewed by the initiate: “You have watched the ceremony

… in Busiris and Abydos. … You witnessed

the divine Son taking over the inheritance of

his father, in the night when the primordial

gods met together,” etc.27 “Your name was called out at the celebration in heaven on the

day that the sheaf was bound. … You rested

on the first, sixth, and fifteenth days of the

month, worshipping Osiris on the day of the

New Moon.” 28 Such combinations29 combine various archaic creation motifs, 30 which occur in older texts. 31 In the temples of Edfu and Esna, the forecourt of the temple was the

scene of the creation drama. 32 For “the origin of the sacred domain was conceived

as a definite act of creation of the Earth

which resulted in the origin of the temple.” 33

The rites which marked the ascension of the

king to the throne and demonstrated the

legitimacy of his power to the world

represented the restoring of Egypt according to the original divine plan—not only this, but

the officiating pharaoh claimed to be actually

repeating the creation of the world:

“Everything the king does is creation.” 34 Or, as Henri Frankfort put it, “The concepts of

creation, sunrise, and kingly rule are

continually merged.” 35 It is interesting that a fundamental religious activity of the ancient

Hebrews was going up to the temple “to read

the story of Creation.” 36

Staged in the temple and pivoting about the

king, the creation story is concerned equally

with the creation of the earth and the creation

of man as episodes of the same miraculous

process, whose miraculous result none can

deny. The story of the earth’s creation does

not, of course, begin on the earth but is taken

back to another setting and then brought

down to earth and continued. Our Breathings

text introduces the creation motif with

celestial visitors coming to establish man on the earth, the creation drama of the

preexistence carrying over into the new

world with the involvement of the creators in

the creation and launching of the human race.

The Creator Gods

Re Comes Down

Lines 20–21: “Re in his coming down, Atum in the evening; Amon is at thy side, … while

Ptah forms thy body (members)”

Here are four creator-gods when we

expect a triad, the three creators of hermetic

tradition.37 As Herman te Velde has recently shown, the importance of trinities of gods in

Egyptian theology is not, as has been

supposed, “an illusion of modern scholars

preoccupied with Christian trinitarian

doctrine” but was an attempt “to answer the

problem of divine plurality and unity,” 38 a

problem that still baffles the Christians.

What spoils our triad here is Amon, who has

to be given a place because this is a Theban

recension of the story and Amon is all-in-all

at Thebes; but as Jean-Claude Goyon shows,

the document is really Memphite, as the

prominence of Atum and Ptah makes clear:

indeed, in the Memphite theology “Atum is

Ptah the ancient,” the same creator who

bestows life in the Opening of the Mouth

ceremony. 39 The multiplicity of creators may be attributed to the common courtesy of

recognizing the offices of age-old and high-

ranking deities of the great shrines of Egypt,

but in doing so a pattern of three is

consistently followed: “Thou enterest thy

palace like Atum … enters his horizon, thou

sittest at the head of thy hall like Horus on

his throne. Thou hast appeared on thy sedan

chair of the Sed Festival like Re at the

beginning of the year” (fig. 60). 40 Goyon

finds the clearest expression of the system right in our Breathings text: “My throne is

Heliopolis, my seat is Memphis, my

dwelling is Hermopolis,” paying due

homage to Atum-Re, Ptah, and Thoth

respectively. 41 “Three are all gods,” says a famous hymn to Amon, “Amon, Re, and Ptah.

… Their cities on earth are … Thebes,

Heliopolis, and Memphis.” 42 Not surprisingly, this comes from a Theban hymn

to Amon, who in our Breathings text appears

as something of an intruder in the old, classic

northern trinity of Atum, Re, and Ptah. Yet

from very early times, the drama of creation

and resurrection was presented along the

royal progress route in Egypt, principally “at

the three great capitals of the land:

Heliopolis, Memphis, Thebes,” with the king

himself playing leading roles. 43 At Heliopolis, the chief primal god and creator

was Atum; at Memphis, it was Ptah; and at

Thebes, Amon (Min in the earliest times),

while Re was, from the Fourth Dynasty on,

the supreme god common to all of them. With

the same royal troupe acting the same play

everywhere, it is easy to see how the four

great gods, if they ever were separate, would

have to learn to live with each other.

Figure 60. Two hawk-headed deities carry the

pharaoh in a unique sedan chair made of the

hieroglyph representing the sed- festival.

Reconstructed drawing from festival hall of Thutmose III, Karnak, ca. 1450 B.C.

Erik Hornung explains such name juggling by Frankfort’s statement that “the god” is

always “the god with whom you have to

reckon in the circumstances,” 44 and he compares the system with the chemist’s

chains of elements, which can be formed as

needed and broken up again into their intact

elements, from which new chains can be

made. 45 Thus Amon-Re is not a synthesis of Amon and Re but a new entity ( Gestalt)

existing beside the other two: Re is in Amon, but each retains his complete identity.46 Any one of the four gods in our text will illustrate

the principle.

Thus men are enjoined to recite or perform

( ỉrỉ) and thereby realize “all the words of Tem [Atum],” —for instance, “I am Atum

when he was alone, I having come into being

in the Nw (celestial regions or waters). I am

Re when he appears in glory in the

beginning, this one who rules for him. Who,

then, is this? It is Re in the beginning, …

appearing in glory as a king (at his

coronation). … Nw, whose name brought

forth the Great Council ( psḏ.t) of the gods.”

Who is this? Re, whose name created “their

members who became his Followers. … It is

Atum in his disk, Re on the eastern horizon,”

etc. 47 Here, Re and Atum, as the great creators and initiators, are associated and

even identified without any boggling of the

mind. “The nature of the Egyptian gods,”

writes Hornung, “is a transitional thing

( Schwebezustand): … there is no place for

the absolutes of our monotheism.” 48

Egyptian gods can be readily combined in

a father-son relationship which proclaims

the identity of their nature and office.49 The total unity-in-plurality is represented by the

all-male trinity.50 The idea of a trio representing different aspects of the same

being is clearly suggested by the three main

aspects of the sun in the sky: “I am Kheper in the morning, Re at noon, and Atum in the

evening.” 51 “These modalities are joined in the name Khepri-Rēʿ-Atum” ;52 but whereas our Breathings text includes two of the

names in their solar aspects, taking some

liberties with one of them, it forgets Khepri

to bring in Amon and Ptah instead. The

Sensaos Breathings text takes similar

liberties, its opening lines—“The Hathor

Sensaos … says: I am Re in his rising; I am

Atum in his setting; I am Osiris Head of the

Westerners in the night” —assigning a

different function to Re and introducing a

different member of the triad. 53 In Heinrich Brugsch’s catalogue, Re is the morning

instead of the noon sun, while Khepri is not

the morning but the night sun;54 the one thing that does not change, as George Nagel notes,

is the identification of Atum with the evening

sun—he is always that.55 Yet as Atum-Re, he

is the rising sun, whereas our text mentions Re (who is the noonday and often also the

rising sun) for his ḥtp, his coming down or resting. This takes us back to the Egyptian

creation drama mentioned above, which, in

Sethe’s opinion, “recalls vividly the biblical

creation story” since the word ḥtp means not only that the creator was “pleased” with his

handiwork but “suggests also the resting

( ḥtp) after the accomplishment of labor. ”56

Furthermore, ḥtp also means coming down

or descent and, in the present text, keeps up

the biblical atmosphere, with the creator

deigning to visit the earth, especially since

he seems to be engaged in a special business

with Atum. There is another sense in which

the “coming down” at the creation is

important—that is, when a god, such as

Thoth, is sent down to earth to inspect the

condition of things and then return and report

to the Most High ( nb-r-ḏr) . 57

Atum Equals Adam?

“Atum in the evening” —why evening, if

the occasion is the creation, which the

Egyptians, like most other people, naturally

associated with the sunrise? Why the

emphasis on the coming down of the god

instead of the rising sun? Indeed, the Sensaos

text begins: “I am Re in his rising; I am Atum

in his setting.” 58 It is not the solar but the human drama which is being presented.

Atum is unique as one who is a creator, yet

human, equally at home in heaven and on

earth.59

Atum and Re stick close together in

creation contexts. Re “comes down” to be

with Atum, or, as in the passage just cited,

when he comes down, he is Atum. “Re

comes down to me in his evening,” says a

Coffin Text that forcibly calls to mind God’s

walking with Adam in the evening,

especially when we read what follows, “and

we walk about ( dbn=n) and stroll around ( pẖr=n, orbit) the heaven.” 60 The setting fits, too, in the next spell, when “Re takes the arm

of N[N]” (the candidate) and places him in

his Garden of Reeds and puts him “in charge

of the plants, of which he freely eats. ”61 It is Re who is concerned with what goes on in

the garden—“The great god, who breathed

(into the) creatures ( ỉrw, shapes, forms) within his verdant gardens, who explains

( wḏʿ mdw) the secret matters of the vestry of Re.” 62 But the one he deals with is Atum, he who comes down to earth and changes his

name in doing so. The classic instance of this

is Re himself, who is known by the name of

Atum when he descends to earth, as attested

by our Book of Breathings. This name

changing is clearly indicated in Coffin Text

80: “I am the living one … whom Atum

made as (to be) Neper (the corn-raiser)

when he sent me down to this earth, … when

my name became Neper (or Osiris) the son

of Geb (earth).” 63 When he moves from a heavenly to an earthly role, his name is

changed accordingly.

Figure 61. Reconstruction of a rare surviving

pyramidion (pyramid capstone) made of polished

black granite to endure through eternity. The scene on the left side, facing the rising sun, proclaimed that the pharaoh was beloved by Atum of Heliopolis and Re-Horakhty. Reconstruction of Khendjer pyramidion,

ca. 1755 B.C. Courtesy of Cairo Museum.

At On (Heliopolis), Atum is the greatest of

gods: “I am Atum who created the Great

Ones.” 64 He is also older than the gods: “I am he for whom the heavenly hosts were

assembled, upon whom divine authority

( ȝḫw) was bestowed,” etc. (fig. 61). 65 But for all that, Atum is more of this world than

any of the other three; for not only is he god

come down to earth, but the earth itself

comes out of him.66 Gustave Jéquier posits that the original Tum-Atum was chthonian

and represented the inert matter of the

creation, though endowed with the

potentiality of giving breath to “all life. ”67

That is why Re becomes Atum when he

descends to earth: “Thou risest as Re in his

name of Ḫprr; thou mountest the sky as Re; then thou alterest thy course from their view

as Re in his name of ‘Atum,’” and “as the

First of the Westerners enterest Osiris as

Atum enters into Re.” 68 But even at an early time, “the overwhelming majority of

occurrences of Atum in the Pyramid Texts

indicate his human character. … Atum as a

cosmic deity is in the darkness.” 69 Only at Heliopolis does the “Atum theology” give

him priority as creator: “I am the Living One, the master of years, who lives for

eternity, Lord of Eternity; whom Atum

created in his splendor … when he was one

and became three in Heliopolis.” 70 At Heliopolis, the king would be brought before

Atum for his blessing at the coronation;71 and the ultimate blessing desired by the dead at

the end of his long journey was to “eat bread

beside the living in the temple of Atum, ”72

just as the king ends his strenuous ritual

water journey safe in the arms of Atum. 73

“Thou enterest thy palace like Atum …

enter[ing] his horizon.” 74

Creation is but one act, no matter how

often repeated, and the creator is always the

same. “It cannot be too often repeated,”

Gertrud Thausing insists, “that all divinities

may be traced back to the primal powers of

creation and conception. ”75 Everything that Pharaoh did was considered an act of

creation, carried out according to an ageless divine plan: Sesostris I and Thutmosis I both

claim to be “repeating the creation,” “doing

what their father Re did” before them.76 At the creation, Aten is saluted “in his name as

father of Rēʿ, who has returned as Aten.” 77

It is hard, in some of these associations, to

avoid hearing the name of Adam for that of

Atum. And indeed, Eugène Lefébure, noting

how closely Atum resembles Adam in his

attributes and finding no philological

obstacles to equating the names, asked,

“Why not identify him with the biblical

Adam?” 78 Alexandre Moret later pointed out that the first inhabitant of the first place on

earth, the “anthropomorphic god, Atoum,”

had “a name which is equated ( rapproché)

with Adam. ”79 The name Atum signified, according to Moret, both the creator and “the

[collective] sum of all future beings. ”80

Other studies have concluded that Atum

means “all-embracing,” “the sum of everything ( Inbegriff des Alls),” 81 or the uniting of many in one, combining all

preexistent beings in a single archetype who

thereby represents all beings thereafter. 82

This agrees with Joseph Smith’s definition of

Adam in the Pearl of Great Price: “And the

first man of all men have I called Adam,

which is many” (Moses 1:34). What

complicates the picture is that Atum is also

the creator, 83 specifically the creator of man;84 he is “the ancient one” par excellence, “the first hypostasis of the

demiurge at the time of the creation, … the

word of Ptah incarnate.” 85 Yet the breath of life comes from his mouth as well.86 In the Breathings literature, the heart which alone

can give a man possession of eternal life is

that of Atum, but only “as a hypostasis of

Ptah,” who created man in the first place. 87

Figure 62. Ptah, with the symbols of the creation, stands upon the Stone of Truth (Maat), holding the scepters of divine power and everlastingness, with the symbol of all that is firmly established and enduring at his back. The lotus and papyrus columns, in various stages of unfolding, represent the steps of creation, as do the solar disks. The two serpents are Edjo and

Nekhbet, supplying the female element. The

inscription lists various ways of writing Ptah’s name.

1823 engraving in Champollion, Panthéon Égyptien,

[99].

Since this business of launching men into

eternity must begin with a repetition of the

creation, a new life, 88 all the greatest creator-gods are understandably present on

the scene. As in the story of the foredoomed

prince, 89 any deity not invited to contribute could cause real trouble! When Re comes

down, he is Atum, as we have seen, while

Amon and Ptah together form the body of

man and place breath in his body. Whose

body? That can be complicated too, but the

preferred candidate is Atum, by far the most

human of the four: “I am Ptah who has

opened thy mouth. … Thy body is the body

of Atum eternally.” 90 “Thou arisest with thy father Atum,” the dead king is told; “thou art

raised up with thy father Atum. ”91 Atum as the rising and the setting sun, “Re on the

horizon,” “Re coming down, Atum in the

evening,” is necessarily the red sun as it passes between the upper and the lower

worlds. Atum wears the red crown as “the

king comes out of Buto, red ( dšr) as the

flame.” 92 This certainly suggests the well-known meaning of Adam as “red.” In a

Coffin Text, the initiate describes himself as

vindicator of his father Re at the dawn—in

effect, as Re-Atum, but specifically “in my

name of Adamu ( ȝdmw),” where the Semitic

form of the name with nominative ending is

used. 93

Figure 63. Pharaoh, as king of Lower and Upper

Egypt, brings offerings to the two deities who

officiate at the creation of man: Khnum and Ptah,

both turning potter’s wheels. Flanking the door of the Osiris chapel on roof of the temple of Isis, Philae, ca.

A.D. 200. Reconstructed drawing based on

Champollion, Monuments, 1: pls. LXXXIX and LXXXVII and photographs.

Figure 64. Khnum—wearing a crown associating him

with the disk of Re, the sun, as well as the feathers of Maat, the principle of universal order—creates man on the “kicked” potter’s wheel. The ram’s head

makes it clear that these things are purely figurative.

Temple of Isis, Philae, ca. A.D. 200. Redrawn from Champollion, Monuments, 1: pl. LXXVI.

Ptah the Creator

Ptah is the creator, pure and simple, the

great god of Memphis; he always retains that

as his one mark and calling (fig. 62; see

color plate 6). In the Shabako drama it is

Ptah who does the creating, and the one

whom he creates is Atum—another reason

for equating the latter with Adam. Ptah of Memphis is the very old creator-god who

made all things94 and “begot Atum and the other gods.” 95 He is hailed in the Shabako text as “The One upon the Great Throne:

Ptah-Nun, the father who [begot] Atum: Ptah-

Naunet, the [heavenly] mother who bore

Atum.” 96 In creating or resurrecting man, Ptah says, “I am Ptah, I have opened thy

mouth. … I give thee thy two arms, …

opening (?) thy mouth with the water of

renewal. … Thy body is the body of Atum

eternally. ”97 There are other scenes in which Ptah is assisted by another at the creation of

man, the other creator being Khnum: “Khnum

hath formed thee with his hands, and Ptah has

formed thy body” (fig. 63).98 Khnum has a good claim on the assignment since he is an

artisan god who creates as a potter. In temple

reliefs we see “Khnum fashioning the king

previous to his birth” on a potter’s wheel

(fig. 64), 99 the actual skill and energy of a demiurge being a desideratum for the

creation of man. In our Book of Breathings,

where Ptah “forms the limbs” of the

candidate, the verb used is nbỉ, an

expression taken from the shops of the

artisans: it is the creation of the body of man

that is being dramatized here, where, as in

the Memphite drama, the activity of Ptah

“vividly recalls the biblical creation story,”

as Sethe put it. 100 The list of Ptah’s epithets ends with “Ptah as Nefertem at the nose of

Re each day” 101—that is, bestowing the breath of life on him, as he and Amon do for

the initiate as the First Man.

The name Ptah naturally suggests the

Hebrew root *PTḤ, “to open,” and his

nature even more strongly suggests it, for as

creator he is the opener, beginner, begetter,

etc., 102 which even implies that “Ptaḥ

himself, ‘the Opener,’ is probably of Semitic

origin. … He is often referred to as the most ancient of gods. Ptaḥ-Tanen is the god who

formed the ‘oerheuvel’ [primal hill] into dry

land after it emerged from the waters.” 103 He

“has all creative power”; he “is greater than

Atum,” and the highest honor that can be paid

to the king is to call him Ptah-Ta-Tenen—that

is,“Ptah-first-on-earth.” 104 “He is named with the great name, Tȝ-ṯnn. ”105 But when we read of one “who begot Atum and

produced the other gods through Ptah, …

from him all things come forth,” 106 what are we to think? No trouble, if we accept

Hermann Junker’s explanation that “the gods

who have their form in Ptah, … who are

Ptah,” are all manifestations of Ptah; created

and different from Ptah, yet identical with

him.107 All the local Egyptian gods, according to one study, either took their

nature from Ptah or shared a common

background since all “had on the whole the

same qualities from the beginning independently of each other,” those being the

qualities of Ptah—“those of creator, world

organizer, and god of fate.” 108

Amon

In our Breathings text, Ptah and Amon

work together as a team to create the body of

man and place breath in it. As it is Atum who

gives breath in Heliopolis (as Nefertem),

and Ptah in Memphis, so in Thebes (and the

Breathings text is a Theban recension) it is

Amon who “blows ( hh) air into every

nose,” 109 at which time the recipient

“mankind begins to look and to see,” the

opening of the eyes being the final step of

creation.110 Amon as the creator is the “great aged one,” the ancient of days. 111 He is like Re of shining aspect. “Re himself is united to

his body; he is the Great One of Heliopolis

[Atum], also called Tenen [Ptah].” 112 “The

basic fact when the Egyptian ideas of light and darkness are concerned is the role of

light in the process of creation. … [C]reation

began when the primeval god … appeared

on the primeval hill to create light and

order.” 113 Here, Amon is Re, Ptah, and Atum. At the creation Amon takes the form of

the creator Atum, and so the Thebans get

their god into the act on a level not a whit

below the others. But who is Amon? Nobody

knows. He “remains a god without a

history,” not mentioned in any of the archaic

texts; through the whole extent of the records

he remains only Amon, “the hidden one,”

completely absorbed in Re and Atum and yet

always the mysterious first god at the hidden

center of the universe and the beginning of

time114—the most hidden, yet the most intimate one. 115

Amon is not a true name but an epithet,

meant to conceal rather than reveal the

ultimate god;116 anyone who should perchance discover and utter the true name

of the god would be struck dead. 117 Yet, as the god of the empire in association with Re

after the Eleventh Dynasty, Amon’s

importance constantly increased: “Amon Re

is the Lord of Heliopolis, and Atum the old

Lord of Heliopolis, must serve him! ”118

Naturally, Amon is a model of kingship, and

in the coronation rites “Amon … executes a

course analogous to that which the king, in

imitation of the sun, describes around the

shrine of Horus and Seth. … Therefore, the

course of Amon is designated by the same

word as that of the sun, of the dead, and of

the enthroned king.” 119 It is as “the first son and heir of Amon, established as the

lieutenant of Maat,” that the crown prince

“makes the god to rise … , clothes him and

anoints him,” etc. 120 Though long represented as a latecomer to the Egyptian

scene, Amon as the prehistoric Min of Koptos had already acquired human form by

the Second Dynasty, and his name may even

be cognate with that of the first king of

Egypt, Menes.121 It is the same, surprisingly, with Ptah, who at all times has human form

at Memphis and is “thought of entirely as an

individual and a person,” the pharaoh

becoming his personal representative.122

Thus all the high gods who participate in

this scene are thought of as real persons

having strictly human form, for all their

divinity. This is why kings and priests can

enter into the drama without any sense of

incongruity; as in the Salt rites, “the drama

takes place between the gods, some being

incarnated by the priests, while in the temple

the king, functioning as an officiant, is the

intermediary ex officio ( obligé) who transmits the divine actions. ”123 Adolf Erman explains the great hymn to Amon thus:

“His (Amon’s) forms ( ḫprw, states of being) were the Ogdoad, the ‘Begetter’ [a pun on

ḫprw] of the first gods; he who formed Re, that he might complete himself as Atum [pun

on tm completion], who is a common

member with him. He is the Lord of All, who

first existed.” 124

Figure 65. The supplicant walks down the gangplank to join Horakhty, “Horus of the Horizon,” who has

already joined his father, Re, symbolized by the disk, as he sits on the Stone of Truth in a ship that moves upon the hieroglyphic sign for “heaven.” From P. Ani, ca. 1250 B.C. BM 10470 © Copyright The British

Museum.

Figure 66. Typical variations on a theme: (A) The

candidate, here Tasheritmin, serves Re-Horakhty by poling the boat herself, while Sokar in the guise of Osiris looks on from the east. (B) The figure in this scene, here Re, appears regularly in the upper righthand quarter of many hypocephali, including the

Joseph Smith hypocephalus (C), where it is

accompanied by an inscription not found in the JSP

IV version. In the various hypocephali, the solar disk may be either with or without the serpents. If JSP IV

and Facsimile 2 came from the same scriptorium, one should expect almost identical drawings of one and the same object. JSP IV (BD 100, 101) and Facsimile 2, fig. 3. © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

With the forming of a physical body and the placing of the breath of life in it (lines

20–21), an eternal existence on a new level

is assured. Our text makes much of this: one

so equipped is now qualified to join Re on

the horizon (line 21), to sit with Osiris in the

nšm.t-bark (line 22); he is sanctified—nay, deified—victorious ( mȝʿ-ḫrw) “for time and eternity” (line 22). His name will never be

blotted out (line 24), his flesh is forever

incorruptible and imperishable (line 24), his

eternal progression is assured (line 25), he

dwells in the presence of the most high gods

as an ageless and glorified (shining) being

(lines 25–26). He shares solid food with

mortals to prove the reality of his

resurrection (lines 27–28) and immortal

food with the gods (line 29). Let us examine

separately the points not so far considered.

Line 21: “Thou enterest ( or that thou mayest enter) the horizon in company with Re”

Compare above, line 2: “that he might enter (join) the horizon along with his father,

Re.” Both are purpose clauses; since the

objective is not yet achieved at this point; the

rehabilitation of the body must precede it.

The Nšm.t-Bark

Lines 21–22: “(and) they receive ( or that they may receive) thy ba into the nšm.t-bark along with Osiris” (the Berlin Manuscript

has a participle, “thy ba having been

received”)125

It is in the solar ship that the initiate joins

his father on the horizon (fig. 65). One steps

into the sun-ship just as it reaches that place

where the sky touches the earth at the

horizon, as the water meets the land at the

sacred wharf of the pyramid or temple (see

p. 155, fig. 41). It is a ship that carries one in a state of effortless suspension through the

void between the worlds.

Thus we read in Pyramid Text 471 §920–

23: “The servants of Horus purify NN, they

bathe him, they dry him off, they tell him the

formulas for the right road. … NN mounts up

to heaven, … the gods give him a rousing

welcome as he reaches heaven in the ship of

Re,” the ship in this case being the nšm.t-

bark. 126 At his funeral the king “rises from the Watery Abyss, the Nun; he travels in the

barge of Re in the sky, he is identified with

the gods and leads a cosmic life in

heaven. ”127 The Skrine Papyrus duplicates the entire situation in this section of the Book

of Breathings: it opens with a supplication

that the dead “embark in the nšmt- boat” to worship Osiris and to “behold Rēʿ when he

ascends, Atum when he sets” (fig. 66; see

color plate 6), 128 to “go down in front of the pool of Mēʿet, … unite with the stars of

Nut,” and to “join him [Re] who is in the

evening boat” ;129 also to “drink water in

front of the nšmt-boat”130 to “proceed upon the course … of your lake. … May I breathe

the wind that issues from you.” 131 “Grant …

that I may be his attendant in the great nšmt-

boat on the day of the Wȝg-festival; … that I

rest upon the necropolis nigh unto the two

goddesses of Righteousness, and that there

be a portion of mine in the Field of Earu

(i.e., and have a place in the Field of

Reeds).” 132 In Papyrus Louvre N. 3292, the companion piece to Philippe-Jacques de

Horrack’s translation of the text, the

candidate, after being purified with natron

and incense, anointed and clothed by the

Two Sisters, is led by Re himself “into his

bark. … He prays to him at noon in his name

of Re; he supplicates him in the evening in

his name of Atum.” 133 This shows how the Egyptians play around with these images

without ever losing sight of their basic

concepts.

Forms of Ritual Solar Ships and Their Use

The sun-ship goes by various names; it is

identified in the Skrine Papyrus with the

Sokar-bark of the wag- festival, which in turn is identified with the ḥnw-bark and the

mnḫ.t-bark. The primitive hieroglyph for the Sokar-bark, with an oryx head at its prow

(see p. 419, fig. 134), is also the

determinative for the ritual garment, so that

the ship and the garment are the same. 134 In the same spirit, the various parts of a ritual

bark are identified with bodily members of

the god of the dead135—a “vessel” in the broadest sense—while its bow represents

the respiratory passage by which the ship

“goes with a favorable wind,” or (by another

translation) “with effective breathing.” 136

The rite called “Opening the Doors of the

nšm.t-bark” represented, or was, “the ferrying of the mummified Osiris to his

tomb,” 137 for the water journey takes one to the world below as well as that above. In the

coffin chamber of Unas was a model ship,

and the moving of the coffin through the

various tomb passages is described in

nautical terms. 138 Unas has his ferry fare all ready, and from the ferry landing

(represented by the middle chamber) he

makes the final crossing to heaven by

ship. 139 The passage through the waters, whether above or below, is dangerous, and

the nšm.t-bark is attacked by the powers of darkness140 but is stoutly defended by the god’s followers in a combat that was daily

dramatized in the temple as the overthrowing

of Seth. 141 Pictures of the solar-bark go back to the earliest times in Egypt,142 but they are always more than a mere symbol.

In a famous autobiographical inscription,

the official Ikhernofret recalls an important

part he played in rites using a real nšm.t-

bark: “I caused the divine ship to go. … I avenged Wennofre [Osiris] in the day of the

great combat, and threw his enemies into the

water. … The ship landed at Abydos,

bearing (Osiris, Head of the Westerners) …

while all rejoiced in the beauty of the nšm.t-

ship.” 143 And in the equally famous inscription of Neferhotep, “the king went …

to the nšm.t-bark of the Lady of Eternity in order to make his journey. … His majesty

went to the divine ship, the seat (throne) of

this god. The king himself appeared on the

lake in order to join with [the word is snsn]

this god.” 144 In a ritual combat, “the enemy was driven away from the nšm.t-bark,” after which “the god again rested” (line 18). The

attack on the ship is best known in Egypt

from texts known as the overthrow of

Apophis, the great serpent. 145 From the Ramesseum drama146 and the exploits of Horus the Behdetite, 147 it is apparent that

early pharaohs had to overcome real opposition on the water both before and after

the historical pacification of the land. In

funeral rites, the coffin represents the sun-

ship;148 and in chapter 99 of the Book of the Dead, the passenger may not enter the ship

until he has named all twenty parts of it,

which represent the “positive powers” that

will protect him against the negative powers

of Apophis, or the dragon. 149 Accordingly, the boat is nothing less than the “saviour

from death” and as such is carried in

procession by the four sons of Horus, who

thus “support his life.” 150 Unas’s flight to heaven is represented by his being lifted up

by the gods of the four quarters (the sons of

Horus) “on their floats. ”151

I. E. S. Edwards suggests that the real

boats excavated beside the pyramids were

meant to make the pilgrimage to Abydos,152

just as Ikhernofret and Neferhotep both took

real nšm.t-boats safely to Abydos. “Horus in his bark is like the king in his ship and like

the Sun in the morning-bark,” says an

equation from Edfu, “receiving the insignia

after the victory over the Bull of the

Marshes. The captain rejoices when he takes

possession of the throne of his father. ”153

The royal bark was certainly real; and in the

yearly cruise to the “desert valley” for a

universal picnic with the dead, a golden bark

dominated the scene.154

The high point in the career of one great

official was his ride in the boat of the lady

Nekhbet155 of El-Kab to the celebration of the sed- festival of Ramses III in the Delta, in which he rode with Pharaoh’s own vizier,

To, who came to fetch the ship for the

occasion. 156 In Neferhotep’s inscription, the nšm.t-bark belongs to the Lady of Eternity (lines 15–16). The oldest of the ritual barks

is the mȝʿ.ty-bark, in which Pharaoh rode

with the god Sokar as early as the First Dynasty when, in “the accession-year of the

king, … the god Sokar of the Memphite

region … went forth in a barque” for

agricultural rites with the king157 in “a periodic ‘feast of the Maaty Barque.’”158

Thus the Two Maats take one through the

waters of contest, as they do through the

waters of washing.159 In the Pyramid Texts, the dead king is borne “like Sokar by Horus

or his four sons … in the Henu-barque, ”160

this being the same ship “associated with the

burial of the embalmed Sokar-Osiris” in

nocturnal rites161 as well as that celebrating

“Sokar’s triumphal peregrination with the

dawn … tacitly equated with Rēʿ’s

emergence in the East upon crossing the Lake

(and Isle) of Flames.” 162

From all this it appears that the ship is

significant with reference to times and

seasons. The Sokar-ship “journeyed to Luxor

on New Year’s day … to mark the renewing of the life of the universe,” 163 and the nocturnal “Navigation of Osiris” ceremonies

of the Sokar-ship took place at the winter

solstice, accompanied by “Opening the

Doors of the Neshmet-barque.” 164 The Greeks were impressed by the great cyclical

year-festivals that dominated the life of

Egypt, especially by the magnificent vessels

and divine flotillas that sailed the Nile on

those occasions.165 Clement of Alexandria, an Egyptian, says that the ship symbol

signifies “that the sun, taking its way through

the sweet and moist air, begets time,” and

hence is a symbol of time. 166

In the Amduat, the divine ship must pass

through dark regions of the underworld that

are, for some reason, stated to be sometimes

309 and sometimes 120 cubits long; can this

have anything to do with the ideal Egyptian

lifespan of 120 years, or the 309 (or 390)

years that measure the era of darkness of the

Jews?167 The coincidence of numbers can hardly be accidental. The possible identity

of various Egyptian ritual boats is still not

fully determined.168

Figure 67. The sky-vessel is called the “ship of 1000

cubits,” suggesting the designation of the above

celestial Sokar-ship as “also a numerical figure, in Egyptian signifaying one thousand.” Book of

Abraham, Facsimile 2, fig. 4. © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

The founding and building of the Egyptian

temple and the establishing of its rites is

always done, according to E. A. E.

Reymond’s study, by beings who sail from

other worlds; and when their work is done,

“the Shebtiw seem to have sailed away”

again. 169 Some such space travel (often indicated in the Coptic gnostic writings) is

indicated in Coffin Text 162: “He takes the

ship of 1000 cubits from end to end, and he

sails in it to the stairway of fire” 170—all of which most cogently brings to mind Joseph

Smith’s interpretation of the ship in

Facsimile 2, fig. 4, of the Book of Abraham:

“a numerical figure, in Egyptian signifying

one thousand; answering to the measuring of

… time” (fig. 67). Very common are

references to the dead king’s being hauled by

cables to heaven or rowed thither by crews

of the Unwearied or the Imperishable Ones

(meaning unsetting stars). The sky-ship can

make the trip both ways: “I go down among

the weak ones ( ẖȝsw, uninitiated). … I have seized on to the cable of the Ḫnt-mn-ỉt=f; I row in my seat in the divine ship. I have

gone down upon my throne in the divine ship. I control, none being near my throne in

the divine ship; I am in control, not being

without a boat, my throne being in the divine

ship at Heliopolis.” 171

Deification of the Ba, Meaning of

Nṯr

Line 22: “They deify (sanctify, exalt) thy ba in the House of Geb”

The four houses that are the main part of

the prehistoric cult-complex of Papyrus Salt

825 stand for Shu, Tefnut, Geb, and Nut

—“that is to say, the four oldest gods,

proceeding forth from the demiurge, who are

here wind, fire, earth, and sky, the four

elements of which life is comprised. ”172 The four houses—with Osiris squarely in the

middle of them, represented by the ankh-

symbol—make up the House of Life, which

seems to go back to an old tent or reed hut of purification. Geb is mentioned here because,

perhaps, of the four washrooms mentioned

above, only his goes back to prehistoric

times, Geb being the floor of the House of

Life. 173

The word denoting the sanctification or

deification of the ba is nṯry(w), referring to a special state quite different from the

Christian idea of divinity; 174 nṯr does not designate “a god,” according to James

Breasted, but, rather, the blessed dead,

especially the king.175 For the Egyptian, Hornung concludes, “nṯr means any god one

chooses” for a particular situation, 176

individual gods being nothing more than

hypostases, or forms in which the One,

properly called nṯr, may be manifest:177

when the ba is nṯry, it is with that One. A 1969 study concludes that nṯry.t may mean

“deification” or “may reflect the restoration

of divine powers or status.” 178 Of particular interest is Siegfried Morenz’s study of the

meaning of nṯry since his principal evidence is taken directly from this very Book of

Breathings—Papyrus Louvre N. 3284. He

maintains that one is not justified in

moderating the force of nṯry, or “deify,” to something more like “sanctify” or “hallow”

because the root meaning of the word is

simply nṯr, “god,” and the causative s·nṯr was translated by the Greeks as apotheosis.

Then he brings in his exhibit A: lines 21–22

of our papyrus, in which we see “the dead

placed in the society of the gods, while his

ba is received into the nšm.t-bark, with the added specification: ‘They make thy ba

divine in the House of Geb,’” “they” in this

case being “certainly divine beings who

minister in the House of Geb.” 179 There can be no doubt, Morenz insists, that the

Osirianized dead receives the full status of

godhood—indeed, that “to be divine ( Göttlich-Sein) is the characteristic quality of the ba of the deceased.” 180 Hence washing, anointing, censing, clothing, and

nourishing are all rituals of deification,

whether in the temple or the funerary

services. 181 The resurrection process is, in short, a deification process.

The Formula “For Time and

Eternity”

Line 22: “thou art (of the) justified for time and eternity”

Figure 68. Time and eternity were represented by

various divine figures. (A) The inscription from

Tutankhamun’s golden shrine says: “I know the

names of the two great gods: Time and Eternity.”

Here they are holding the pillars of heaven, while in a private tomb (B), two male gods sit holding lamps

with twisted linen wicks. (C) Within the white

headband of the goddess, the artist has drawn the

word nḥḥ repeatedly, an elegant pun showing that she is encircled about with eternity. (A) Tutankhamun, ca.

1330 B.C. Courtesy of Cairo Museum. (B) Tomb of

Neferabet (Theban Tomb 5), ca. 1200 B.C. (C) Tomb

of Seti I, ca. 1290 B.C.

As Eberhard Otto notes, one instinctively

translates r nḥḥ ḏ.t or nḥḥ ḥnʿ ḏt as “time and eternity ( Zeit und Ewigkeit),” which is the common rendering (fig. 68).182 Otto avers that, while nḥḥ conveys the idea of

“unending recurrence of the same, the

concept of becoming, something like our

‘development,’” ḏ.t denotes “ineradicable

endurance,” a state of being established to

last forever. 183 Thomas Allen’s translation of the Book of the Dead supports this, rendering

nḥḥ as “endless occurrence” or “endless

recurrence” and ḏ.t as “changelessness. ”184

Louis Žabkar suggests that nḥḥ is something

“completed,” while ḏ.t is something “taken possession of”; 185 while Abd el-Moḥsen Bakir presents “the idea that nḥḥ connotes the concept of infinity associated with the

time before the world … came into being,

whereas ḏ.t refers to the other infinity, … the time when the temporal world comes to an

end” (fig. 69).186 Étienne Drioton has the

same idea.187 László Kákosy almost reverses the order: “nḥḥ is eternity” for him, while

“the hieroglyph ḏ.t corresponds … to the

static, already past aspect of eternity. ”188

Alan Gardiner has much the same idea—that

ḏ.t is “eternity in the past” and nḥḥ “eternity in the future.” 189 A clear distinction is made in Book of the Dead chapter 17: “Others …

say that the things which have been made are

Eternity ( nḥḥ), and the things which shall be made are Everlastingness ( ḏ.t) . ” 190

Figure 69. The normal sequence of events between

the funeral and the resurrection, as found in many illustrated Book of the Dead manuscripts, such as

these two: (A) The dead passes the western horizon, turning his back on the preceding funeral scene of mourning at the tomb and leaving his food offerings behind. (B) He and his wife pass a pleasant time

playing games in a green bower or booth (a

refrigerium), (C) biding his time in the spirit world.

(D) The quiet passing of time is movingly illustrated by the two tame lions, sometimes wearing fetching

little caps and labeled “Yesterday” and “Tomorrow,”

while the sun rises and sets on the horizon between them and (E) Osiris supervises in the position of a patient herdsman or watchman. (F) The time having

passed, the dead confronts the benu-bird, symbolizing the miracle of periodic revival in nature—it is the arrival of the phoenix. (G) The body having been

carefully preserved and guarded during the interval, (H) the inauguration of organic life is prepared, a tadpolelike wedjat-eye taking form in a placenta while two men, designated as the Nile and the sea, mingle the necessary waters and minerals (one of the two ponds is labeled ḥsmn, “brine”). (I) Finally, the candidate is ready to emerge, like and with Horus, on the horizon, endowed with the life ( ʿnḫ) symbol.

(J) The wedjat-eye proclaims the perfection, or completion, of the process. (K) The universal mother must be present for such a rebirth. (L) The four

canopic figures have come together with all the

elements and parts necessary for the body; the dead at last breaks out of the stone sarcophagus covered by the green and flowery grave mound, triumphantly bearing symbols of life in each hand. P. Hunefer, ca.

1300 B.C., BM 9901, and P. Ani, ca. 1250 B.C. BM

10470 © Copyright The British Museum.

The arguments about which of the terms

refers specifically to the future are largely

academic since eternity is something that goes on to an endless future, no matter when

it began or how long it has been running—as

we gather from Otto (following Heinrich

Schäfer), who points out that both terms refer

to the future but maintains that nḥḥ is

measured in years, whereas ḏ.t, as

“everlastingness itself,” is not so

confined. 191 This suggests Thausing’s idea that nḥḥ stands for life and ḏ.t for death, the one being measurable in years, the other

static and permanent. 192 For Hornung, nḥḥ

and ḏ.t are one more expression of that all-pervading Egyptian dualism between being

and nonbeing, nḥḥ being the former and ḏ.t the latter. 193 “Because of patterned time and place,” he explains, the created is limited to

“episodes between Nothing and Nothings,”

with nḥḥ and ḏ.t being “the time which is granted to existence.” 194 Thausing, on the other hand, finds the basic meaning of nḥḥ to

be “extension,” relating it to the archaic god Ḥḥ, a representative of empty, airy space who sometimes doubles for Shu; 195 extended to time, the idea is expressed by the well-known kneeling, feather-crowned figure with

upraised arms, ḥḥ, the symbol for “million,”

or very many indeed. 196 Sethe saw in nḥḥ the idea of nḥy, something everlastingly sought ( die “Gewünschte” ) but never attained, for eternity is never finished. 197 Thausing calls nḥḥ “seeking without finding” and so related the name of the primitive Ḥḥ with the idea of

“Endlessness, Boundlessness.” 198 Otto notes that Ptah the creator is closely identified

with Ḥḥy as “Lord of Years” —the ancient

of days: “The nḥḥ-eternity thus designates the unceasing recurrence of the same, the

endlessness of time.” 199 He agrees with Thausing that nḥḥ is divisible into years, while ḏ.t cannot be so divided. Žabkar,

however, cites an instance in which ḏ.t is

also divided into years200 and objects to Allen’s rendering of nḥḥ as “endless

recurrence” and ḏ.t as “changelessness” on the grounds that it “convey[s] an un-Egyptian

notion of time and eternity. ”201

The dualism of nḥḥ and ḏ.t suggests matching them with other pairs—for

example, having them designate the right and

left eye or Upper and Lower Egypt

respectively, in which context they can

denote “the everlasting continuity of time and

the legitimate rule.” 202 They identify the rule of the king with the “absolute permanence”

of Osiris himself, who alone survived the

cosmic cataclysm of Book of the Dead

chapter 175, and thus signify “stability

without end.” 203 When Tefnut gives the king the wedjat-eye as n nḥḥ to see the sun by, and the ḏ.t to see the moon, we are to

understand the “everlastingness of the

heavenly lights guaranteeing the order of the

Creation … and the sharing of all creatures in the Light, ”204 making nḥḥ the endless day and ḏ.t the endless night. 205 Thausing further posits that nḥḥ refers to an eternity of time and ḏ.t to an eternity of space, 206 noting that in the Pyramid Texts, ḏ.t appears in

situations dealing with solid, enduring

reality as such, with physical

indestructibility,207 while nḥḥ is the eternity of this world only, the fashion of which

passeth away, and hence refers to the eternity

of death. 208 But Žabkar protests that nḥḥ and ḏ.t are used most of the time

synonymously,209 which is not surprising since any two words associated together in a

formula repeated countless times would

naturally come to share a common meaning;

on the other hand, the fact that not one but

two different words were used originally

implies that a distinction of meaning was

intended.210

There is a general agreement that time as

nḥḥ has an end, being bound to the

conditions and cycles of this world,211

whereas eternity as ḏ.t is something solid and final, written with the earth symbol,

which denotes the ultimate in unshakable

solidity.212 But everyone seems to feel the rightness of both making a distinction and of

closely associating the two ideas to make

sure that the ordinances shall be effective

both “in time,” by whichever means we

choose to measure it, and “throughout all

eternity,” which is not to be measured at all.

This is the expression that closes all major

ordinances, and here it is used to show that

we have reached the end of a separate

document to go with a clearly marked and

independent body of rites. The next page of

the de Horrack manuscript deals with the

next episode.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 23–

26

23 (2/1). [Recite as follows:] Osiris, God’s

Father, Prophet of Amon-Re King of the

Gods, Prophet of Min-Amon, Wsỉr-Wr

[ JSP: Hor],

24. Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified. [ JSP: born to Tay[khebyt. ]]

Abiding is thy name, firm ( or enduring) thy flesh (corpse), hale is

25. thy mummy. There is no holding thee

back in heaven or earth. Made to shine is

thy countenance in the presence of Re;

living is thy ba in the presence of

26. Amon. (Ever) youthful is thy body (corpse) in the presence of Osiris. Thou breathest henceforth for time and

eternity.

Commentary: The Enduring of the

Name

Line 24: “Abiding (Enduring) is thy name ( i.e., Thy name will never perish)”

De Horrack renders this as ton

individualité est permanente. 213 For to the Egyptian “the name is a person’s essence. If

his name perishes, he himself does not exist

any more.” 214 So in Pyramid Text 422 §764:

“Thy name lives on earth; thy name remains

on earth. Thou dost not perish, thou art not

destroyed forever and ever!” 215 For many years the Book of Breathings was designated

by scholars with the title “May My Name

Flourish,” that being the most conspicuous

phrase in the texts of class 1. It would seem

that the preservation of the name, no matter

how or where, assures survival of the

individual, though the main concern in the

texts is to have it remembered on earth since

“by remembering one’s name one enables

that person to live hereafter.” 216 The name

seems positively earthbound in Pyramid Text 601 §1660–61: “May this pyramid be as

solid as the name of Atum, … solid as the

name of Shu … at Heliopolis; solid ( ḏd) is NN (the deceased) and solid is his pyramid

for eternity.” 217 If only as the means of establishing identity, the name is an

inseparable part of one’s individuality in the

ancient world.218 For the Egyptians, the survival of the name meant not only that one

lived in memory, but actually that his body

could survive. 219 To possess knowledge of another’s name is to hold some power over

him, even if it be the high god himself;220

there is nothing mysterious about this, for to

be in the files of a person or agency is a

cause of real concern to any modern man.

Every name is an epithet designating some

peculiar attribute or function of an

individual. That is why it is possible for

persons, even in our society, to have more

than one name, each name calling attention to a different aspect of the individual: for to

have many forms and functions is to have

many names. 221 Some names apply only in special situations and may be dropped when

a particular operation is no longer going on.

Thus in the present text the candidate is

addressed by the special name of Stone of

Truth only while he is standing on the

washing pedestal.

When Re says to the gods, “I have many

names and many forms; … (in me) Atum and

the youthful Horus are addressed,” he

signifies that he may be conjured either as

the ancient of days or the newly born,

depending on the name employed and the

situation in which his presence is desired.222

When, in the same story, Isis asks Re to tell

her his true name so that she can cure him, he

gives her instead a list of epithets which are

indeed his names, but names which he shares

with others: “I am Khepri in the morning, Re at noon, and Atum in the evening.” “I am he

who possesses many names.” 223 But that is not good enough. “I still don’t know your

name!” cries Isis, 224 meaning that name he shares with no one else, “a name which even

the gods do not know.” But there is even a

special name to cover a divinity in his

capacity of concealing his real name! It is

“Amon, he whose name is hidden,” to

pronounce whose real name brings instant

death.

The name of Amon is “high and mighty and

powerful,” to the utter destruction of him

who dares pronounce it, 225 and absolutely secret. When Khonsu appears as one “whose

name is not known and whose nature and

form are not known,” we are expected

automatically to identify him with Amon and

address him as the Hidden One. 226 To have

“grasped the names of the 42 demons … in

the Hall of the Two Maats” is to comprehend their natures,227 while to conceal one’s own name is to conceal one’s nature. 228

The economy of the name is far more than

a primitive superstition. It is the principle on

which modern society is organized, which

alone makes it possible for individuals to

deal with each other as such. Thus if one’s

name is not known to the government, the

latter has no control over one—one simply

does not exist. Numbering does not change

the situation save as it eliminates

duplication, which a plurality of names is

supposed to do anyway. As the Gospel of

Philip observes, everything in the world

must have a name if there is to be any

communication and hence any understanding,

so that it is by falsifying the names of things

that Satan is able to enslave the world. 229 In the operation of the gospel plan, names play

a peculiar function. As every man is “the

man Adam,” so every man may become a Savior (Jesus), an Anointed One (Messiah,

Christ)—those are the names of individuals,

but also of types. Just as Caesar was one particular man whose name is borne,

however, by many others—but only such

others as qualify for a certain office and

calling—so an individual coming in the

spirit and power of Elijah, whether it is

Elisha or John the Baptist, is said to be

Elijah, “if ye will receive it” (Matthew

11:14); there is a special key to the business

(Matthew 17:12).

Figure 70. In an elegant bas-relief, the king raises the djed-pillar, inaugurating the new world and the new age. The lady with him is his queen, identified with a birth-and-vegetation goddess. Reconstructed from

drawings and photographs of the tomb of Kheruef

(Theban Tomb 192), ca. 1350 B.C.

Immortality of the Flesh

Lines 24–25: “firm ( or enduring, solid, ḏd) (is) thy flesh (corpse, physical remains),

hale ( rwḏ) is thy mummy”

What is emphasized here is that whatever is physical about the subject is going to be

indestructible and immortal. Rwḏ means

“firm, strong, enduring, … effective, …

prosperous, … successful” :230 the thing not only lasts forever but in so doing retains all

its vigor; rwḏ is identified “by confusion with [the verb] for ‘grow’” also. 231 The ideas of enduring and flourishing are also

expressed together in the word ḏd, which

signifies not only what is lasting but what is

tough and solid as well. Both words

designate the body in its purely physical

aspects—it is the flesh that lasts and blooms forever. One might also maintain that the

clause ḏd ḥȝ.t=k ritually suggests the

“raising up” of the body since the predicate

is indicated by two djed-pillars, and the

raising up of the djed-pillars was, for the Egyptian, the classical symbol of the

resurrection (fig. 70). 232 The two djed-

pillars also represent the shrine of Busiris, where the ritual death and raising of the god

took place.

The word used here for “mummy,” ʿḥ.w,

means, literally, both “that which is wrapped

up” and “that which is ennobled,” the latter

being written, as here, with a seal-ring

ideogram signifying that what is wrapped up

is sealed, set apart, and thus ennobled or

distinguished.233 These lines seem to illustrate the point, made by Hornung, that

the Egyptians were rather afraid of

eschatology, 234 dreading the fatal step that might sever the tie between themselves and

reality; the name, the corpse, and the mummy

are present realities which one wants to

preserve indefinitely. “The Egyptians called

the dwellings of the living ‘lodgings’

because one only stays in them for a short

time, but they call the graves of the dead

eternal dwellings because they spend

endless eternity in Hades. ”235 Those are two realities that all must recognize, but our

Book of Breathings does not stop there, as

the following lines will show.

Eternal Progression

Lines 25–26: “There is no holding ( or turning) thee back in heaven or earth. Made

to shine is thy countenance in the presence of

Re; living is thy ba in the presence of Amon.

(Ever) youthful is thy body (corpse) in the

presence of Osiris. Thou breathest ( or thy breathings are) henceforth for time and

eternity.”

If ḏd and rwḏ indicate more than states of passive survival, the vigor and strength they

denote are carried over right into heaven, to

which their possessor proceeds with nothing

able to stop ( ḫsf) him. Ḫsf means to “drive away, ward off, oppose” and regularly

denotes the challenge and opposition that the

initiate meets at the gates, doors, caverns, waterways, and other obstacles where he is

tested.

The last people in the world that popular

imagination would associate with the idea of

progress are the Egyptians, yet Hornung has

pointed out that those people had a positive

passion for progress! “Every king,” writes

Hornung, “wants his plans to surpass and

cast in the shadow everything that already

is” ;236 the Egyptian temple, he notes, was never finished because it was always being

enlarged and improved. 237 While each dynasty claimed to be repeating the creation,

“doing what their father, Re, did” in the

beginning, 238 each was determined to surpass all that had gone before and so

approximate that divine plan more perfectly

than had yet been done on earth. As might be

expected, it is the Coffin Texts that drop the

most frequent hints of an eternal progression:

“I am Tomorrow, Lord of Yesterday” ;239 “I am better today than I was yesterday”; 240 “I have passed by the gods of Nut and

advanced my place to that of the preexistent

ones. The ancients never got as far as I did

on my first flight!” 241 The sealing of one’s family to him in the next world “is truly a

thing for infinite time ( ḥḥ n sp), by which a man continues his great progress ( ỉw mn n=s

ḫpr wr.t) . ” 242

Light and Breath as Glory

Line 25: “Made to shine is thy countenance in the presence of Re”

The sure sign of divinity for the Egyptians,

as it is for other people, is radiance

— Glanz. 243 When the candidate is resurrected in the rites of Papyrus Salt 825,

he is filled with the light ( sȝḫw) by

ministering deities who “occupy themselves

with his new physical body ( r wšȝ) more than with the body he had before.” 244 One seems to hear familiar echoes, orthodox and

gnostic, in Coffin Text 75: “I was not born of

the flesh but of the spirit ( lit. breathed forth from the nose). He made me in the midst of

his perfection ( or beauty, etc., nfr), causing those to rejoice who shared the secret, when

he spread out heaven in his ( or its) beauty, raising up all the heavens for the gods that

are in them sitting in council (at the gates), 245

that they might behold his glory. I am the

great god who breathes forth the creatures

(forms) in his green fields (gardens,

meadows).” 246 In an early Christian account, the Lord, coming to the apostles after the

resurrection, “breathed upon [them] and …

gave them a beginning only of the gifts of the

Spirit. … And by means of the breathing he

taught them in very mysterious fashion that he

is himself the creator of Adam, … shining in

the spiritual image and the beauty that flashes

from it [his own spirit], and sharing in the

divine likeness.” 247 The same combination of images is strikingly clear in each case.

Figure 71. Illustrations of the “trinity” principle are extremely common in Egyptian religious documents.

JSP IV (BD 104). © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

Triads in the Book of Breathings

It begins now to appear that our author

favors groups of three (fig. 71; see color

plate 6). He has mentioned the glory of the

sun, moon, and stars; the washing of the

front, back, and inward parts; cleansing in

the Halls of the Maaty, Geb, and Shu;

initiation by Amon, Ptah, and Re (the

initiated being Atum); the survival of the name, the corpse, and the mummy on this

earth and of the countenance, the ba, and the body in the next as they shine, live, and

become young again respectively in the

presence of Re, Amon, and Osiris

respectively. In the fifth hour of the Amduat,

just before the person begins his ascent to

heaven, he is enabled to do so by bringing

together his flesh ( ỉwf), his members ( hʿw), and his body ( ḏ.t): though they are all the same thing, they represent three steps in

achieving its integrity. The result of this is

eternal life, in which body and spirit meet in

the concept of snsn, the meeting and fusing of the physical and spiritual, the divine effusion

of light, spirit, air, mind—of life in the

highest sense, ʿnḫ being the sum total of air, breath of life, light, and health.248

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 26–

29

26. … Thy ba makes for thee

27 (2/5). invocation offerings of bread, beer,

flesh, and fowl, of libation water and

incense as the requirements of each day.

Thy flesh is upon

28. thy bones, made like thy very form(s) upon the earth: Thou drinkest with thy

throat, thou eatest with thy mouth,

29. thou receivest (offering) bread, along with the ba s of the gods. Anubis guards thee; he is ( lit. makes) thy security.

Commentary: The Ritual Meal

De Horrack notes that this is a special

section standing by itself and employing

“different phrases for resurrection and future

life.” 249 It deals with the ritual or sacramental meal which, as in the early

Christian church, regularly follows baptism

or purification rites.

Invocation Offerings

Lines 26–27: “Thy ba makes for thee invocation offerings”

The correct interpretation of “invocation

offerings ( pr ḫrw)” has been much

discussed. “The difficult expression,” wrote

Gardiner, “obviously had pr ḫrw ‘the voice goes forth’ as its starting-point.” In the

Eighteenth Dynasty it is hard to tell whether

the offering comes forth “at-the-voice” of the

offerer—that is, by the power of his word—

or whether it is the dead person who comes

forth “at the call of the offerer” to partake of

the meal. 250 Aylward Blackman prefers the second alternative, “a coming forth unto the voice” of both living and dead to share in the

feast.251 The Wörterbuch identifies the people summoned with the dead only: “pr-ḫrw, the offering to the dead (at which the dead came forth from the grave at the call

[ ḫrw] to feed.” 252 Thausing notes that the remembering of a dead person’s name is

necessary for the pry.t ḥr ḫrw rite, the ka being the one called forth. 253 That the food may be called forth is implied in the

Amduat: “They [the ten gods] live by what

he [Osiris] lives on, they breathe by the

words of this god, and by their own

prayers,” 254 where the utterance of words supplies necessary sustenance. Blackman

notes that there is an especially close

association of the miracle of food with

creation, citing an instance in which the

table-god is an emanation of Shu: “He hath

become Ḥu who sendeth forth thine

utterance.” 255 Another possible interpretation of lines 26 and 27 is “Thy Ba

pronounces a blessing” over a ritual

offering-meal.256

Throughout the ancient world, purification

and clothing rites are regularly followed by

a ritual meal. Originally a dominant theme in the rites of purification and Opening of the

Mouth, the taking of nourishment, according

to Hermann Kees, was progressively

reduced until it became a mere gesture or a

few chanted words. 257 In Coffin Text 179, the gift of the garment goes with the meal as

at royal feasts everywhere. 258 The meal usually takes place at the completion of some

strenuous ordinance representing a journey

or contest, especially after crossing the

waters, when one naturally needs rest and

refreshment. 259 The first thing one does upon arriving at the goal is to rest and recoup

one’s strength, as Adam does upon finding

himself in a new world, or as any pilgrim or

traveler does, or as the early Christian did in

the anapausis or refrigerium after negotiating the passage from this world to

the next. Almost invariably the Egyptian

ritual feasts take place on the bank of a

stream or lake which has just been crossed.

The meal is a natural part of the (re)birth or

resurrection drama: as soon as the newborn

babe is washed, tidied up, and properly

swaddled (mummy-fashion), 260 it receives nourishment—the honey that induces it to

take the nipple and the milk that follows. 261

Blackman observes that “the Solar-

Pharaonic toilet [is] followed by a meal, …

the royal toilet and the meal [being] the basis

of all the other main Egyptian religious

rites. ”262 A devout Egyptian reports that he faithfully did his monthly stint in the temple,

“putting on the white sandals, … reciting the

secret things, entering the holy of holies, and

eating of the bread of the House of God”

(fig. 72; see color plate 6).263 The passage is strongly reminiscent of the shewbread of the

temple at Jerusalem, in which Alfred Adam

sees a clear anticipation of the Christian

sacrament.264

Figure 72. The upraised ka-arms embracing the food offerings show that this is a spiritual or sacramental meal. The two vessels are for water and oil, or natron and incense, the meal being part of the purification.

JSP IV (BD 105). © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

The stock assumption that the food, both

real and pictured, found in Egyptian tombs

could only have been meant by the simple-

minded people to feed the dead in the next

world betrays the working of the modern

rather than the Egyptian mind since, as

Frankfort points out, such “supplies do not

prove that the Egyptians considered life after

death a mere continuation of life upon earth.

… It is not even correct to assume that …

supplying funerary provisions carried the

materialistic implication which it inevitably suggests to us.” 265 Commenting on Book of the Dead chapter 30, E. A. Wallis Budge

writes: “It will be noted that Ani does not

ask for sepulchral offerings … ; all he asks

is that Osiris will consider him worthy to be

introduced into the company of truthful

Spirit-souls who live always in the presence

of Osiris.” 266 If anything, the food seems to be a transitional affair, like everything else

in this document—a viaticum to serve only

for a brief period. Hans Lange points out that

while no one was in a better position to

provide for future food offerings for himself

than the pharaoh, “it is nonetheless more than

doubtful that the services for the dead were

regularly carried out for the kings.” 267

Fruits of the Field

One has the impression that once the

ordinances were taken care of, the dead was

henceforth on his own in a wholly other sphere not in any way dependent on this

world. Even if the dead was “nourished to

stimulate his physical powers,” it was for

the same reason that he was washed and

clothed—to get him through a crisis of

passage, not to keep constantly feeding him,

as when he was on earth. 268

With ample provision of heavenly food,

the problem of alimentation has been solved

once the dead reaches the lush gardens of

rest: “They say to me: What then dost thou

live on? I live on white barley of the height

of the eastern part of heaven. … I have come

forth as bread and water.” 269 As Otto notes, the food offerings were not brought for the

purpose of feeding another but, rather, to call

attention to the god “as bestower and source

of these gifts” and to the donor, the king, “as

one who assists the growth of vegetation.”

The basic principle is do-ut-des, in which

the giver expects to receive what he has given, but in greater abundance. 270 One

“makes ( ỉrỉ)” food offerings in cemeteries.

Ritually, the verb ỉrỉ is a locus technicus, according to Zandee, meaning at the same

time to plant and cultivate a garden and to

make offerings or provide for such by a

grant.271 In either case, the food offerings in the tombs were but a first installment of what

would be supplied elsewhere hereafter. A

distinction between various levels of

nourishment is certainly made in the Coffin

Texts: “I live from the seven things coming

forth upon the offering-table of the spirits of

Heliopolis: four of its things are for heaven

before Re, three of its things are for earth

before Geb.” 272 “From what do I live? they ask me. I live from seven things; four of them

are for heaven in the presence of Orion, and

three of them are for earth in the presence of

mʿnḏ.t-bark, coming forth to the offering-

table place of the spirits of Heliopolis. … I eat choice food upon the reeds, in the

presence of Ḥknw and Snw.” 273 The dead specifies that he eats only what is eaten in

heaven. 274 “What does Osiris live on? … It is from the green sm-plant that he lives. ”275

“I do not eat what Geb (the earth) has

brought forth ( or displayed, wṯs).” 276

In the Breathings texts, the inhalations of

food odors277 are definitely a part of the meal: In Papyrus Louvre N. 3279, the dead

is depicted sitting before a table with a huge

lotus, holding a breathing sign in her hand

like a fan (see p. 78, fig. 17).278 The purpose of the meal is to supply food, water, “and

especially the breath of life, by fumigation

with perfumed substances,” all three being

necessary to life.279 “The Horizon-dwellers say to me, ‘Eat beneath the tree of incense in

the place of Refreshing (rejuvenating; nfr.w)

Breezes.’” 280

One of the eleven Joseph Smith Papyri

(no. II) contains a lively plowing scene with

the caption “Cultivating ( skȝ)” and three

characters indicating that the heaven is being

opened (fig. 73; see color plate 4). 281 It is not an earthly farm here depicted, for the

sowers are not clad in the familiar scanty

manner of Egyptian field workers but wear

long, white, linen temple robes, and they do

not carry bags of seed. Moreover, they sow

among the trees, while just beyond them

(here drawn just above them, according to

the Egyptian convention of perspective) one

is seen traveling by boat—it is the ritual

garden by the river. The situation is

described in Coffin Text 189: “I reap with

my sickle (plow with my plow), I make a

loaf of dough from the offering-food of Ssr

of the Duat, white barley, to make an evening

meal of wheat; my food-offering, it is of

seven things, coming forth at the great table-

place of the spirits of Heliopolis: Four

things for heaven, … three things for earth;

… I have pulled the ship to the land. This is

my spread at Heliopolis.” 282 The dead operates a veritable farm there among the

sycamores283—not an earthly farm, but one where heaven and earth meet and join.284

Figure 73. JSP II shows the dead sowing in green

fields among the trees and by the waters, over which she also sails. That this is no ordinary farm is seen in the ritual robes of the Lady and the inscription above the oxen: “The heaven to its entire extent ( p.t (r) ȝw=f) , ” an idiom apparently telling us that this represents heaven or paradise. Reconstructed

drawing of JSP II (BD 110). © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

In going through the Forty-Day literature of the early Christian church, one is often

reminded that one purpose of the Lord’s

insistence on having a meal with his

disciples when he would meet with them

after the resurrection was to show that he had really been resurrected (Luke 24:39–43;

John 21:9–14). As Ignatius explains, such

meals were to keep the brethren in mind not

so much of his crucifixion as of his

resurrection. 285 Such is certainly the sense of the lines that follow. A Christian eucharistic

table from Egypt bears the inscription

hygianon phage kyriakou (eat health from

the Lord), showing that the salutary effects of

the meal are physical as well as spiritual; the

curative powers of the eucharistic food are

the subject of many legends. 286

This mystery is designated by Ignatius of

Antioch by the identical expression

— pharmakon athanasias, “medicine of

immortality” 287—which Diodorus used to characterize the Osiris mysteries. 288 Since a sacramental meal is one attended by those

both in the world and out of it (and by the

Messiah himself, according to the Rule of

the Congregation), 289 the many Egyptian steles depicting participation of the living

and the dead together in family feasts at a

tomb may be viewed as sacramental scenes.

Life-giving Food, the Heavenly

Meal

Lines 27–28: “Thy flesh is upon thy bones, made like thy very form(s) upon the earth:

Thou drinkest with thy throat, thou eatest

with thy mouth”

The section as a whole expresses the idea

that the dead, by partaking of the meal,

confirms the reality of his resurrection

(creation), which he demonstrates by eating

with his mouth and drinking with his throat.

If there was a real washing and anointing

with water and oil, there is no less a real

feeding: Louis Speleers lists the proper

order of the rites as “washing … , drying off,

massage, brushing, ‘shaving,’ ‘primping’

( soignage), perfuming ( fumigation), [and]

nourishment. ”290 The meal is an indispensable part of the temple rites and has

the same purpose of launching the candidate

properly into a new life (Winfried Barta

demonstrates this from the Pyramid Texts). 291

The insistence on the physical act of eating is

to make clear that the subject is more than a

spirit, that whatever spiritualized forms of

ḫpr.w he may have gone through, in the end he is going to be restored “in the exact form

that he had during his earthly existence.”

Some of the scribes seem to balk or boggle

at this, exactly as the Christian clergy always

have;292 thus the Kerasher Breathings text

avoids mentioning flesh altogether, while Papyrus Louvre N. 3291 supplants the

important “as thou wert on earth” by the

“spiritualized” phrase “as thou mountest up

to earth.”

Line 29: “Thou receivest (offering) bread ( snw-bread), along with the ba s of the gods”

Snw is “offerings” of sacrificial bread;293

with another determinative, it can also be

“wine of Pelusium,” 294 while the hieratic characters in different order give šns-bread. 295 In the last case, the dead receives food “from the altar of the great god,” and in

our version he shares it “with the ba s of the gods.” By what right? Why not? The food of

the ritual meal is holy and, as such, meant for

immortals as well as mortals. 296 Kees reports that in the original Egyptian agrarian

kingdom, all officials were fed, literally,

“from the table of the king. ”297 The

sacramental meal, shared by mortals and immortals, is necessarily the common food

of gods and men, even as men’s food comes

from the king’s table. 298 It is smw, a vegetable diet, which, with bread and beer,

is the staple food of the immortals. 299 “As to every spirit for whom this is done, … he eats

and drinks in the presence of Osiris every

day, and he is made to enter with the kings of

Upper and Lower Egypt every day” ;300 to share food with gods is no more

presumptuous than to share it with kings. In

the Jerusalem temple the priest, after taking

the “ritual bath,” would eat “the ‘bread of

the Presence.’” 301 The sacral meal of the sons of Zadok “in the heavenly temple” was

for them “an anticipation of the perfected

ritual of the heavenly temple.” 302 A common formula in the Coffin Texts declares that the

dead abhors eating any unclean thing but

partakes of seven or nine or three things on

three levels: “There are four things in heaven

under Re, three things on earth under Geb,

and two things in the temple” ;303 “I live from seven things. Four of them for heaven before

Orion, three of them for earth before the

mʿnḏ.t-bark; and they come forth on the table of the spirits in the temple at Heliopolis.” 304

Figure 74. The sun shines on the ished-tree, hailed by the dead man and his wife. P. Neferwebenef (P.

Louvre N. 3092), ca. 1360 B.C. After Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, pl. LXXV.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 38–

41, 57–58

38. Thou makest the rustlings (whisperings,

breezes, scatterings, splittings) of the

[ JSP adds: most] noble ished-tree in Heliopolis when thou awakenest

39. every day and seest ( or upon beholding) the ray(s) of the sun. Amon comes to thee bearing the breath(s) of life; he causes thee

40. to begin ( or make) breathing in thy coffin and come up to earth every day.

[ JSP continues: There is given to thee

the book … ]. The Book of Breathings by Thoth is as thy protection(s);

41. thou breathest by it every day [ JSP

adds: like Re] when thine eye beholds the rays of Aton [fig. 74].

57. … Re shines upon thy cavern (house,

hill [ JSP: high place]) [fig. 75], Osiris ( or O Osiris!), that thou mayest ( or mayest thou) breathe and live

58 (3/15). by his rays.

Figure 75. The dead goes forth when the sun shines on his home, represented as house, tomb, and horizon.

Here he stirs forth as a shade, his ba accompanying him. P. Neferwebenef (P. Louvre N. 3092, BD 92),

ca. 1360 B.C.

Commentary: The Awakening

We have seen that the Opening of the

Mouth rite was a resurrection, a rebirth, a

restoration, a healing—a new creation. 305 It began in the “workshop,” where the

preparation of a statue of the deceased

represented the creation of his body,

corresponding to the preparation of the

mummy in the House of Gold. In each case,

the body is first formed and then life is put

into it by the Opening of the Mouth

ordinance. The rite was discussed above in

connection with washing and anointing, that being its nature, but it can introduce any main

phase of an initiation; and in our Book of

Breathings the formula is given in lines 36–

37 and line 57, in contexts in which the

theme is the awakening of the initiate into a

new world (lines 38–41). The idea of an

awakening is the most obvious of all imagery

for both the resurrection and the creation of

man.

The Rising Sun Awakens All to Life

Before considering the all-important

ished-tree, let us look at the circumstances of the awakening. It is natural to describe the

resurrection of the dead as an awakening

from sleep: “Thou sleepest that thou mayest

awake; thou diest that thou mayest live!” 306

“The Great One awakes. … Osiris has risen

to his feet.” 307 One awakes into a new life and a new world. Initiation as passage is

beautifully expressed in the Judeo-Christian Epistle of Barnabas 6.11, 16: “He made us

new by the remission of sins; he made us

another type, that we should have the souls

of children, as though he were creating us

afresh. … We are they whom he brought into

the good land.” 308 The Egyptian endowment begins with the awakening of the candidate,

who, having just passed through the purifying

“waters of Re,” emerges now as flesh upon

the earth; 309 he has now come to “the secret land ( tȝ štȝ),” and the actors in the rites at this point all change their costumes to match

the shifting of the scene to “a mythical

place.” 310 In coming down to earth, the subject changes his name and his identity: “I

live in the members of my father Atum. I am

… he whom Atum created with ( or as)

Neper when he sent me down to this earth …

when my name became Osiris, son of Geb

(the earth).” 311 In the Stundenwache, the

awakening of the dead is dramatized as repeating the original creation of man by

Geb, who, after “organizing” all his

members and organs “opens thine eyes for

thee and stretches thy wrapped limbs,” 312

having done the same at the creation of the

first man to make him great and mighty and

strong and give him dominion over all

things. 313 At the completion of his purifications, Pharaoh is pronounced pure,

even as Horus the newborn babe, washed by

the four pure goddesses; 314 he is pure as Horus-Min (the first man) when he ate the

fruit in the garden and his eyes were

opened.315 He is weak, like a newborn babe:

“The god awakens in peace, in

weakness.” 316

Figure 76. The dead (his mummy, or his statue

standing as proxy) is clothed, greeted and instructed, and conducted into the presence of the sleeping sem-

priest, playing a role, who then arises. Reconstructed drawing from the tomb of Menna (Theban Tomb 69),

ca. 1380 B.C.

The Sleep of Sem and the

Awakening of Adam

One of the most discussed episodes of the

Egyptian initiation ceremonies is the so-

called Sleep of Sem, which “has puzzled all inquirers.” 317 As the scene opens, we see the sem-priest sitting—huddled in the embryonic position and covered with a skin wrapper

representing the womb318—on a special kind of bed or low settee, as if he were asleep,

beside a statue which is to be symbolically

animated (fig. 76). This is the first episode

in the Opening of the Mouth, 319 and the statue is necessary in the funerary version because

the real subject is dead, though his wrapped

mummy sometimes serves in place of the

statue. As Otto explains it, there is one other

person in the room, the ỉmy-ỉs or “officiant of the chamber,” who stands behind the

sleeping person and calls out four times,

“My father!” 320 At the same time, two other figures quietly move onto the scene; they are

ẖry-ḥb.t with the script, and the ỉmy-ḫn.t in charge of this particular room or episode, 321

who are to take specific roles (Otto calls

them Gegenredner) in the play that

follows. 322 In our Breathings text, they are probably Ptah and Amon, standing on each

side of the seated and sleeping figure to form

his body and put the breath of life into it

(lines 20–21). The sleeping man speaks: “He

has broken me! ( sḏ.n=f wy)” and sleeps on.

Then either he or the ỉmy-ỉs says, “He has

thrust me forth!” and then cries “My father!”

four times, after which the officiant cries out,

“Awake, thou sleeping one!” “The sleeper

awakes and notices the three ỉmy.w-ḫn.t ( lit.

“those in the room”) who have entered while

he was sleeping,” or else the ỉmy-ỉs is now joined by the two new arrivals. 323 As Otto sees it, the sem pretended to sleep and then, upon his awakening, announced that he had

seen the father in his sleep. 324 The various words used for “sleep” suggest to Otto that

they are meant “as stage directions,

indicating the instructions to the

participants.” 325

Figure 77. The inscription announces that this is “the sleep of sem performed in the Golden Room (creation room, workshop)” and that there is also an

awakening. Reconstructed and adapted from

drawings and photographs of the tomb of Seti I, ca.

1290 B.C.

As Helck interprets it, it is two men, the

ỉmy-ỉs (“head of the workshop”) and ẖry-ḥb.t (“reader for the ceremonies”), who

awaken the sleeper. He says, “I lay there and

was awakened; I slept and someone touched

me. I have seen my father in every form,”

whereupon the two ask him, “Is not thy father

with thee?” 326 As S. Mayassis tells it, upon

awakening, the sem immediately hunches up on the bed and says to the four priests (the

magasinier and three officiants), “I have

seen my father in all his forms” (fig. 77).327

Sleep, like water, is one of those images in

which reality and symbol meet and fuse. It is

both the rest of the body and the freeing of

the spirit. The sleeping of the sem

represents, according to Helck, the spirit’s

sojourn in a distant world, in which the

candidate visits his dead father in order to

receive his “personality. ”328 Mircea Eliade sees in the initiation a ritual death, or

regressus ad uterum, making it possible for the subject, through the ordinances, to enter

the earthly phase of his existence as a true

man. 329 Karl Kerényi notes that for the Greeks, a man’s true creation was completed

in the ordinances, before which he was

atelēs—unfinished, uninitiated. 330 Mayassis posits that when the sem says, “I have seen

my father in all his transformations,” he is ready to be reborn at a higher level.331 The ritual sleep may also be the “visit to Hades”

required by initiation.332

What all interpretations agree on is the

sojourning of the man’s spirit in another

world with his father before being thrust

forth to awaken in this world. He is,

however, aware of the situation only while

he is still asleep, for in the mysteries

everywhere, the sleep is also a forgetting. As

Alexander Altmann points out, “The place

where the dream of Jacob occurred is the

place where Adam was created,” according

to Jewish tradition, “namely, the place of the

future Temple”; there we behold how, “in his

earthly existence, Jacob, who stands for

Man, is sunk into sleep, which means he has

become forgetful of his image and

counterpart upon the Divine Throne.” 333

Joseph Smith makes a like connection

between Jacob’s dream and the temple.334

Altmann relates this to the gnostic idea that

sleep represents spiritual death, the

“forgetfulness of man’s divine origin.” 335

What we see in Jacob at Bethel, the place of

the temple, is really “Adam who has

forgotten his image on the Divine Chariot …

asleep down below.” 336 A very early Christian writing tells how Adam, having

settled things with the rebellious Lucifer,

proceeded to come down to earth with a

heavenly escort but, upon arriving, fell into a

deep sleep. 337 One seems to get some such picture from Coffin Text 149: “I came forth

from the council of the President of the

Westerners. I slept, being separated from

him, being watched over by those who

belonged with him in the realm of the gods

( ẖr.t-nṯr) .” 338 The cry of the sleeping sem,

“He has broken me! He hath thrust me forth!”

recalls both the expulsion of Lucifer and the

sending down of Adam, as set forth in the Discourse on Abbatôn. 339

The close association between coronation

and creation is seen in the pyramid rite in

which the king is commanded to shake off

sleep, arise, and receive his power in

Heliopolis—meaning, Joachim Spiegel

points out, to perform the ordinances of

coronation.340 Of particular interest is the dramatic text from the cenotaph of Seti I,

being an adaption—or an imitation—of much

older writings, according to Adriaan de

Buck, who stresses both the great importance

and the baffling nature of the text. After the

first few lines, de Buck finds the document

“utterly unintelligible” —“a large part of it

consists of little more than incoherent words

and disjointed phrases.” 341 This is a good illustration of de Buck’s own dictum that the

real difficulty in understanding an Egyptian

text lies in our ignorance of “the plot and

story of the spell as a whole.” 342 For, once we have an inkling of the sem situation, the totally incomprehensible dramatic text of

Seti I begins to make good sense.

Though it must be borne in mind that “the

text is written in an unfamiliar and partly

enigmatic orthography,” having been

transmitted from generation to generation of

scribes in a process which contributed to the

steady deterioration of the manuscripts and

knowledge of their contents,343 still, the number and the sequence of the peculiar

episodes leave little doubt that we are

dealing with the “sleep of sem.” First, we see Horus confined and helpless,

represented by the sem-priest “sitting down”

on the earth. 344 Then he gains strength and arises, rejoicing; joins his wife and mother

(marriage and birth are fused in the ancient

year-rites); has his eyes opened; goes

through a purification and birth ceremony; 345

becomes as a child;346 is told to put forth his hand and gather or partake of something or

other;347 and then propagates the race, leading to a repetition of his own rebirth. 348

The whole chain of events begins with the

sem-priest sitting completely alone and

withdrawn, apparently distressed “because

Geb [the earth] has confined him.” 349

The Instructors Arrive

In the sequence of ordinances, 350 the sem-

priest performs most of the rites, taking the

role of the sleeper351 and the beloved son.352

What follows the awakening? Three ỉmy.w-

ḫntyw stand before the seated sem-figure to reassure and instruct him. 353 Just as in an early episode of the Breathings text two

deities (Amon and Ptah) formed man and put

breath into his nostrils, so now two

messengers come from above to instruct his

mind,354 specifically to instruct him in the

carrying out of certain ordinances: after the sleeper wakes, a messenger is sent forth

from ỉmy-ḫt-ḥr (also called ỉmy-ḫt-wr, both terms indicating the very highest of all in

authority) to fetch Horus (the king) “that he

might carry out the necessary ordinances that

follow.” 355 In the very ancient Ramesseum drama, it is the divine teacher Thoth himself,

the instructor in all the mysteries, who

appears to teach Horus beside the mȝ-tree, 356

even as he instructs the high priest Hor in the

temple in the Setna cycle. 357 In the Jewish tradition, when Jacob falls asleep, as Adam

did, he is visited by angels who come down

to teach him the ordinances.358 The Coptic Apocalypse of Adam has Adam say: “But I

slept in the thought of my heart, and I saw

three men before me whose form I did not

know. … They said to me: ‘Adam, arise, and

learn about this world and about thy

posterity!’” 359

The sending of instructors is in keeping with the promise of the three ỉmy.w-ḫn.t to the sem: when he reports, “I have seen my

father in his physical body ( qd),” they reply,

“Thy father will not leave thee alone,” and

the peculiar language they use suggests to

Otto that they are promising the sending of a

“heavenly messenger ( wn, Götterbote)” 360 to the initiate. After this promise, we next see

“my father in his created body praying to

God.” Whatever father this may refer to, the

word for “praying” is written with the

unusual ideogram of a praying mantis,

suggesting a particular gesture of

supplication.361 In the Book of Day, as Re himself has come down to the Field of

Rushes and walks with the subject, presently

two “mysterious figures arrive” to assist;362

they are none other than Ptah and Thoth. The

interesting thing here, as in our Breathings

text, is that the candidate does not go to

heaven to meet the gods, but they come down

to earth for his benefit.

Figure 78. Maat, designated as “Daughter of Re and Queen of Heaven,” is seated on the nb-symbol of dominion in a flourishing lotus pond or papyrus thicket, bestowing both life and breath. Reconstructed from drawings and photographs of entrance to the tomb of Ramses III, ca. 1180 B.C.

Enter the Lady

But the awakening is not complete without

the presence of a lady. When the sleeping

sem opens his eyes, he sees not only the two or three messengers who have awakened him

but beholds a much pleasanter sight: a fair

woman is standing nearby, and the

messengers say to her, “Isis, go to Horus,

that he may seek for his father!” This means,

according to Otto, that the man must join

company with the woman “that he might

carry out the necessary ordinances that

follow,” even as Isis led Horus to the

presence of Osiris, whom he was seeking.363

In our Breathings text, at the moment the

initiate starts breathing and first sees the rays

of the sun, he is hailed as Maat, written not

with the usual abstract symbol of truth but

with the picture of the Lady herself (lines

40–41); she is the Lady with whom he has to

do more than any other. But who is Maat?

We have already noted some of her symbolic

aspects; but aside from them, she is Eve—as

mother, but especially as wife and

companion. Her name, according to Frankfort, illustrates “the impossibility of

translating Egyptian thoughts into modern

language,” 364 and Professor Rudolf Anthes states: “The idea of Maat cannot be rendered

by any word in any other language. … In the

following [study] a translation has been

avoided.” 365 But nobody can leave Maat alone, because she is an altogether agreeable

figure. Of all the Egyptian deities, only she

has nothing disturbing or in any way sinister

about her; she is altogether good, desirable,

and delightful. She is very close to the

king, 366 the earliest pharaohs calling themselves “Lords or possessors of

Maat.” 367 Some maintain that she is a pure abstraction of the human mind, a

personification, an idea, an ideal divinity—

nay, “the very essence of all divinity” ;368 but in spite or perhaps because of this, she is

always very feminine. And though, like

every important female deity in Egypt, she is sometimes identical with the great Mother

herself—as when she appears as the mother

of Re, from whose side she never parts369

—“the goddess Maat was most often called

the daughter of Re” (fig. 78)370 and corresponds to Horus, the son, as Hathor

corresponds to Re, the father. 371 She is the king’s royalty itself, 372 and at the coronation the new king becomes entirely fused with her

as “Lord of Maat. … ‘Thy right eye is Maat,

thy left eye is Maat, thy flesh and members

are Maat. … The garment clothing thy

members is Maat, what thou eatest is Maat,

what thou drinkest is Maat. … Thou existeth

because Maat existeth.’” 373 This is said of Horus, but Re depends no less on Maat,

without whom he cannot function as

creator, 374 since Maat was “something established by the primal god and then

periodically guaranteed by the king when he

ritually overcomes the chaos of the universe

to establish the world order. ”375

Figure 79. Many texts insist on the complete identity of male dignitaries, particularly the crown prince, with Maat. In the Book of Abraham, Facsimile 3, fig. 4, she takes his place as the “Prince of Pharaoh.”

© Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

Maat as Wife and Mother

Nothing is complete without Maat, and

where she is present all is well. Naturally,

she is the wife of Thoth as the “great judge

who fixes the laws and pleases the great lady

of the gods (Hathor of Denderah) by his

sentences. ”376 When we are shown scenes of the king offering Maat to Hathor, 377 we see

her as the younger of the Two Ladies. If Hathor is the perennial Mother, Maat is the

perennial consort and wife: “Maat embraces

thy neck as an amulet; she rests upon thy

breast. ”378

Maat displays a capacity absolutely

unique among the deities of Egypt for fusing,

joining, wedding herself with another in

joyful and salutary combination; of course,

the union must always be proper and legal

since Maat, by very definition, is legality

itself (fig. 79). Nay, Maat is “the

embodiment of every possible social

relationship,” male or female, 379 and is immune to the slightest hint of scandal since

she is honor, uprightness, and legality

personified, representing truth, justice, and

order in the corporate life—three ethical

values which are “a reflection of the cosmic

order.” 380 She represents things as they should be, the “perfect status quo,” which,

unfortunately, does not prevail in this world. 381 She is Wisdom ( ḥōkhmāh, sophia), who plays a dominant role as the

most vivid personification in early Jewish

and Christian literature. 382 She is the female component of everything, without which

nothing can exist and without which nothing

is complete: “kings and judges were nothing

more than her representatives on earth,” 383

for “Maat … is … the female principle,

analogous to the male ruler of the universe;

… for the contemplative consciousness it is

all one and indivisible. ”384 Hence if Akhenaton brought the cult of Maat to a new

high in Egypt, he also wanted everyone to

know that he shared all equally with his

darling wife.385

If, then, the subject of our Book of

Breathings seems to have a love affair with

Maat, we may be assured that everything is

in proper order. In the waking of the sleeping

sem, the role of the woman remains puzzling because “the texts give neither the rites nor

the ceremonies in their completeness,”

Mayassis finds; in some versions it is the

Lady herself who awakens the sleeper. 386 In the Coptic Hypostasis of the Archons, the

“spiritual woman” comes to the sleeping

Adam and says, “Arise, Adam! and when he

sees her he says: ‘It is thou who hast given

me life! Thou shalt be called the Mother of

the Living!’ She is indeed my mother, even

the physician”387—that is, she both gives life and restores it. In the Babylonian rites, it is

“the queen of the dark room, … Mother of

the Temple,” Innini, who enters “the chamber

of Ea” and awakens the sleeper, crying:

“Arise, thou sleeper! The gates of heaven are

open!” 388

The woman can be designated by any of

the names of the great mother-goddess; as

Isis, she is myriōnymos, “the Lady of

Countless Names.” 389 But in the present context, she is usually Nut: “Thou art a king,

because thou art not to be distinguished from

Osiris, Re of Heaven,” says the priest to the

candidate in the text of the Anchnesneferibre

Stela. “Thou art the great son of Nut, born to

Re, … nourished with her milk.” 390 But we have seen that the beginning of all things, as

far as this earth is concerned, was Maat, “the

foundation of all order and existence.” 391 So it is not surprising that when the Egyptians

thought in literal historical terms, they

recalled that it was the lady Maat who, in the

beginning, came down as a real woman and

associated ( snsn) freely with mankind in the garden, at that time when there was no

enmity between any creatures. 392 The primordial reign of Maat “includes absolute

peace reigning on earth … resulting … from

the state of innocence” before the fall.393 The woman is the beginning of all things because

she alone possesses the secret powers of creation, ḥkȝ; 394 every man passes through this mortal sphere “following after the

Mother of All.” 395 Thausing speculates that the male element (Re, Thoth) fulfills the law

of time in its motions, while the female, as

his wife, though remaining in the background

(she is Seshat, “the Secret One”), provides

the space (the housing, cosmos) which makes

possible the fulfilling of the law. 396 It can hardly be an accident, as Jan Bergman points

out, that the names of Isis and Osiris alone

are written with the same symbol—a throne

or seat;397 without both of them, there could be no establishment and no government.

According to her name, Isis, the mother, is

“the Oldest, the Greatest, the Beginning, the

Primordial, Primeval, Preexistent One, ”398

“the First,” the “One and Only.” 399

Compared with her high offices of “primal

mother and foundation of all existence,” the

primal fatherhood, Bergman thinks, is a very poor and feeble thing indeed. 400 Yet there must be a balance; the two must unite in one.

The gnostics taught that when Sophia-Maat

got the idea that she could bring forth and

rule the world without the partnership of the

male, her plans met with disaster and she

repented bitterly before she got permission

from the father to rejoin her heavenly

mate.401

It is understandable that the waking man

got the impression that the woman came first

and was thus the beginning of all things, 402

for when he awoke into his new existence,

he had forgotten the old: all he was sure of

was that the woman was there before him—

what could he assume, then, except that this,

the highest of all creatures known to him,

was the mother of all living? In the funeral

texts, the woman does not sleep but watches.

It is interesting that the Egyptians, though

following a matriarchal succession (king is a feminine word in Egyptian, as Sethe noted

long ago),403 have no title of queen; the royal mother in the great rites at Memphis took the

parts of the queen of heaven and the divine

earthly queen, 404 but her highest title was Wife of the God and Mother of the God. 405

Neith, as the first queen of Egypt, “contains

in herself the powers of male and female

undivided”; she is “arsenothēlys, … ‘Father of the Fathers, and Mother of the

Mothers.’” 406 On the other hand, Khnum the creator is Neith “insofar as his figure

represents the feminine principle.” 407 The creator as “Ptah on the great throne” is,

according to the Memphite theology, both

“Ptah-Nun, the father who begot Atum” and

“Ptah-Naunet, the mother who bore

Atum.” 408 When Atum, “reposing in the place of his delight and exploring it,” says,

“I have come forth to claim my family,” he

declares all to be in order since “Neith (Nut) came to see me … as Master of Heliopolis

and God of Abydos,” and they settled

genealogical problems between them. 409

Wilhelm Czermak has compared the

Opening of the Mouth episode to the

awakening of Adam in the Bible; the man

becomes “the man Adam” in the fullest sense

only when he opens his eyes in a new world

and, having forgotten what went before,

“sees” and “knows” as his intellect awakens;

but the most important thing he sees and

knows is his wife, after which God makes

him aware of the rest of the creation, which

he proceeds to investigate and name.410 John Bailey sees a like situation in the Gilgamesh

epic and the Old Testament concepts, where

“the woman is both the initiator of the man

and at the same time she is initiated, along

with him, into the knowledge of good and

evil.” 411 The great festival of the valley ends

with a prayer to the first parents that all may

receive the same enlightenment that they

received: “Amon [and] Mut, … [Father and

Mother!] Give understanding, strength of

heart, and peace … to the ka of [NN]

forever!” 412

Figure 80. The Underworld, here designated as

Rostau, is both the house or shrine and the

mountaintop of the dead. BD 119, ca. 100 B.C.

Redrawn, courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

“The basic fact when Egyptian ideas of

light and darkness are concerned is the role

of light in the process of creation.” 413 The awakening of the reborn initiate “to the light”

is a stock theme of religious and

philosophical literature. 414 In our Book of Breathings the subject receives particular

attention. From lines 38–41 and 57–58, it is

apparent that the sleeper is awakened when

the rays of the sun fall upon his face as he

lies sleeping in the depths of the earth. These

passages are especially important for setting

the scene, real or imaginary, in which the

rites take place.

Awakening by the Rays of the Sun

Lines 38–39, 41, 57–58: “thou awakenest every day and seest ( or upon beholding) the ray(s) of the sun, … thou breathest by it

every day when thine eye beholds the rays of

Aton, … Re shines upon thy cavern (house,

hill), Osiris ( or O Osiris!), that thou mayest breathe and live by his rays ( or when Re

shines upon thy cavern, thou breathest and

livest by his rays)”

The idea is the same—that it is the rays of

the sun that bring life into the dark grave and

underworld. The sign for “cavern” gives a

number of choices: wbn Rʿ ḥr qr.t=k (when

Re shines upon thy cavern) or ḥr qr=k (upon thy high place), or, in the Joseph Smith

manuscript, ḥr tp ḥw.t=k (upon the roof of thy house). The determinatives for hill,

mansion, and cavern are almost exactly alike

in hieratic (fig. 80; cf. p. 345, fig. 108),415

and they are equally relevant to the present

situation, in which the sun penetrates to a

particular spot on or in the earth in order to

initiate the miraculous return of life.

Figure 81. Various ways of showing how the sun must rise between mountains (A), as well as temple pylons (B and C), indicating the significance of

orientation in tomb and temple.Eight baboons greet the rising sun between the wings of the pylon (D).

(A) Egyptian hieroglyph, ȝḫ.t, meaning “horizon”; (B) P. Wesay, Khary, ca. 1250 B.C. BM 9949

© Copyright The British Museum; (C) TCD MS

1661/2 by permission of Board of Trinity College

Dublin; (D) reconstruction of second pylon, funerary temple of Ramses III, Medinet Habu, ca. 1180 B.C.

The Temple as an Observatory

It has often been noted that the great

Egyptian ritual complexes, especially those

at Heliopolis, belong to the tradition of the

megalithic centers. The Pyramid Texts

definitely associate standing stones with the

observation of heavenly bodies and their

motions: “O Rēʿ-Atum, this King comes to

you, an imperishable spirit, lord of the

affairs(?) ( ḫrw.t) of the place of the four pillars. … May you traverse the sky, being

united in the darkness; may you rise in the

horizon, in the place where it is well with you. ”416 The four pillars are, as Raymond Faulkner notes, the four cardinal points; 417

the spell is repeated four times, perhaps

once in each direction, since the king must be

throned facing four directions at his

coronation.418 The marking of celestial motions by apertures is clearly indicated in

Pyramid Text 503 §§1078–81: “The sky is

opened, the earth is opened, the apertures of

the celestial windows are opened, the

movements of the Abyss are revealed ( lit.

opened) [fig. 81],419 the movements of the sunlight are released. … I seat myself upon

(the throne) ‘she who preserves justice.’ I am

back to back with those gods in the north of

the sky, the imperishable stars. … When

Montju is high, I will be high with him; when

Montju runs, I will run with him.” 420 The apertures which reveal the motions of

heavenly bodies suggest a sort of

observatory. Association of Maat with “the movements of the sunlight” is now confirmed

by Wolfhart Westendorf’s study of the huge,

ancient maat-stones that directed the beams of the sun’s light into the interior of the

temple. 421 The throne of Maat, who guarantees the orderly motion of all

things, 422 suggests the augural throne, here facing south for the proper observation of the

heavens—in this case, of a specific heavenly

body, Montju being, Sethe and Faulkner

suggest, the name of a star. This recalls the

Roman augur observing the heavens from his

augural seat in the center of a templum,

marked out on the ground and probably

designated by stones. 423 The opening of palace or temple ( pr-wr, “great house”) to the sky for purposes of observation is

indicated in Pyramid Text 456 §§852–56:

“Hail to you, Great One. … The roof (?) of

the Pr-wr is torn off (?) for you, the Pr-nzr

serves you, the apertures of the sky-windows are opened for you, the movements of the

sunshine are released for you. … Hail to

you, Soul who are in your blood (‘an

allusion to the reddened sun and sky at

dawn’),424 … who takes his place at the zenith of the sky (vs. Sethe: ‘at the point

where earth and sky meet’). 425 … You traverse the sky in your striding. … The King

knows … these spells of Ḥarakhti, … and

the King’s hand will be held in the sky

among the Followers of Re.” 426 Faulkner suggests that perhaps “the roof is torn off to

admit the sunshine.” 427 The whole passage is a reminder that the most august title of

Pharaoh was that of Great Seer, or Greatest

of Seers ( wr mȝ.w), the name being written with the peculiar ideogram of two stones or

eyes and referring to his office of observer

of the heavens in the great temple complex of

Heliopolis.

The place where the heavens are observed is the place where they are closest to the

earth, where heaven and earth touch; the

stone pillars of the shrine are the pillars and

ladders of heaven428 (compare “the three principal rounds of Jacob’s ladder” as the

three degrees of glory).429 The sun temples of the Fifth Dynasty, Thausing points out,

“were not buildings but ways marked by

mighty stones.” 430 Karl Schuchhardt concluded that the Egyptian temple was the

final development of the Menhirgedanken

that produced the cult-places of giant

standing stones found all over the ancient

world. 431 Ernesto Schiaparelli found at Heliopolis the remains, now vanished, of an

enormous stone circle six hundred meters in

diameter and forty meters thick, of unknown

nature, which he attributed to King Zoser,432

and Lina Eckenstein long ago suggested a

relationship between the Orion-Sirius cult of

Egypt and the megalithic monuments of the western Mediterranean area. 433 More recently, William Dinsmoor has compared

Giza with Stonehenge, 434 with special attention to its orientation and solar affinities

—an exercise which has never lacked its

devotees. 435 Association with Stonehenge is no mere fantasy, however. A. H. Sayce, the

severest critic of Joseph Smith things

Egyptian, reported in the first volume of the

Journal of Egyptian Archaeology the finding of “well-known Egyptian beads of Egyptian

faience and coated with Egyptian blue glaze”

in the barrows of Salisbury Plain near

Stonehenge: he dated the beads “in the 14th

century before our era” by comparison with

the Egyptian article. Carbon-14 dating has

recently turned the tables in a surprising

manner by showing some of the megalithic

remains of northwestern Europe to be older

than their counterpart in Egypt—by some

two thousand years!436 The binding link of pyramid and temple, heaven and earth, has

ever been the mysterious cornerstone,

keystone, foundation stone,437 which applies also to the capstone of a pyramid. 438 The building texts of Egyptian temples claim an

incredibly long line of descent from the

“senior ones,” who were among the founders

and builders of the mythical temples of the

primeval age. 439 The megalithic tradition leaves its stamp everywhere: Jewish

tradition tells how Adam, being cast out of

Eden, longed for a glimpse of his heavenly

home; God sent down a precious stone of

paradise, which marked the place where the

temple would stand, saying “O, Adam, I

have sent down to you a temple for you to

circumambulate as the angels course around

my throne; pray at it as you used to pray in

my presence at my throne.” So Adam

continued his heavenly peregrinations on

earth.440 Eusebius reports as an eyewitness in the fourth century that there is in the center

of Jerusalem a stone circle ( peribolos

lithinos) enclosing an altar with an eternal light on it, tended by ascetic priests who

never drink wine.441

To acquire and display the knowledge of

the spheres meant anticipating their every

move. The Egyptian temple was no mere

shelter or dwelling place, but a structure

built with the greatest precision in which

every dimension was meticulously

measured. 442 For its proper operation depended on the continuation of life on earth

from generation to generation. 443 To possess secrets of the powers of the heavens without

a knowledge of the sources of that power

was impossible: the power was available,

as the knowledge was available, only at

certain set times and places: everything

required the most exact observation. “The

pillars of heaven are uncovered for you, that you may behold the secrets that are in

them.” 444 As the Greeks often remind us, the wise priests of Egypt were philosophers

and, above all, astronomers. 445 Also, they were the most ancient of all scholars446 since the Egyptian temples are the earliest centers

of the serious study of things.447 All of this is in agreement with the Book of Abraham. To

be meaningful, the motions of the heavenly

bodies must be measured and those

measurements recorded: the imperishable

stars of the Dipper are nothing less than the

“makers of the annals ( gn.wt) of Ḫpr-Re, which reveal the secrets of the places.” 448

Figure 82. This is an example of how the Egyptians cherish, preserve, and expand the temple. Four

pharaohs have added chambers to the original temple of Thutmosis III at Karnak—but along a central axis, preserving not the idea of home or dwelling-place of deity, but of passage and initiation. Temple of Ptah, Karnak.

But how can those motions be exactly

measured? That is one purpose of the elaborate arrangement of the early temple

complex, the temple itself being a scale

model of the universe (fig. 82). 449 The primitive arrangement consisted of at least

four houses surrounding a ritual reed booth

in the center, with a sterile floor of sand, an

encircling fence of stones with four gates to

the cardinal points, the whole open to the

sky, for “only the sun was authorized to

behold what went on in the court.” The

whole thing was called the House of Life.450

The sun cult early produced ritual complexes

of staggering magnificence. 451 The movement of the sun and moon can be marked by the

motion of shadows cast by tall upright

stones452 or by their disks touching such stones as viewed from a certain fixed spot,

or by appearing in an aperture between two

stones, or by the beam of light falling through

such an aperture or window onto a marked

surface, or by the illuminating of marked surfaces set at various angles; in the case of

the sun a real image of the disk could be cast

by a “pinhole” without lenses on such a

surface, with sunspots and (during eclipses)

corona perfectly visible. Such an image

could not escape any conscientious observer

of the sun’s motions, which are most easily

measured not by its dazzling disk but by the

light patterns it casts since the real image

appears projected on the ground even when

the sun shines through the leaves of a tree

and puts on a real show in darkened

buildings. The most impressive phenomenon

in nature being eclipses, the main interest of

the observers in the Egyptian temples, as at

Stonehenge, may have been the watching and

predicting of eclipses. 453 That exact prediction was all-important to vindicate not

only the knowledge of the priesthood, but

also the order of the universe and man’s

proper adjustment to it—a reality shown in the intense excitement with which the

Egyptian populace awaited the long-foretold

phoenix year of A.D. 139, when Sirius, the

sun, and the Nile would rise together for the

first time in 1,460 years. 454 The Egyptians were careful students of the solar disk in all

its aspects, which change constantly during

the day, 455 and the candidate for initiation had to check the heavens and watch for the

signs, “that thy name be called at the sixth-

day festival; … that thou behold Rēʿ when he

ascends, Atum when he sets.” 456

The Egyptians measured the motions of the

heavens, and especially of the sun, with

reference to certain established markers on

the earth. Their sun-clocks used both

shadows and beams of sunlight.457 Even the traveling Egyptian had his portable sun-watch.458 The best-known alignment is the ȝḫ.t symbol of the sun rising exactly between

two mountains. The entrance to every temple was a stately pylon, arranged like the two

mountains so that the sun would rise exactly

between them at the turn of the year or the

equinoxes.459 Over the main gate was the symbol of the winged disk rising on its

wings, the gate itself forming the same

design as the primitive trilithon of the

megalithic temple. 460 Indeed, tradition identified the pillars of the temple with the

standing stones, or “Ghosts,” left by the

ancestors as “The Place-in-which-the-things-

of-the-Earth-were-filled-with-power.” 461 As is obvious to all, the sides of the Egyptian

pylons are not vertical but always sloping;

this, says Pierre Gilbert, is because they

“converge toward a point very high in the

sky” above the temple, a point toward which

they draw our attention, 462 everything being designed to mark the involvement of our own

lives in the course of the sun.

Figure 83. This small, inlaid wooden sundial reinforces the idea of the sun rising between pylons as shown by the sun-disk over the doorway. Actual size 3 1/16” , Meroe, Nubia, ca. A.D. 20. By permission of Oxford University Press.

It is common throughout the ancient world

to speak of the sun as rising and setting at

certain gates, and the sundial from Meroe,

shaped like a megalithic trilithon, shows us

how old those gates could be (fig. 83). 463 “I know the gate in the midst of heaven by

which Re comes forth in the East,” says the

candidate in Coffin Text 159.464 Such gates are often mentioned in the Apocrypha, with

their Egyptian taste for “cosmism.” Thus the sun and the moon have a fixed series of gates

for their risings and settings: “the Lord made

these gates and thus provided in the sun the

device for measuring the hours of the

year,” 465 while the moon has its own series of twelve gates. Enoch reports that he “has

measured the circle of the sun, and numbered

its rays and its entrances and exits and all of

its movements,” and done the same for the

moon. 466 In Egyptian temples, sun-windows served the same purpose as the gates;

windows, being smaller, could allow for

more exact measurements. Horus presides

over certain creative ceremonies when he

looks through a hole at something very white

on the other side, 467 and “the wounding of the eye of Tebi [solar eclipse?] is calculated

by the counting of holes.” 468 We can conclude “without any doubt,” according to

François Daumas, that “the sun … that comes

forth out of the celestial ocean, as indicated in the Poem of the Windows, by illuminating

with its nine rays the temple of Denderah,”

announces “the periodic return of the order

of light, triumphant over the darkness of

chaos. ”469

A variation on the theme is the royal

window of appearance, at which Pharaoh

would appear to the people as the sun,

shining between the two great front pylons

(fig. 84). 470 In the Babylonian Enuma Elish, the various heavenly bodies have their

windows through which they make their

appearance. 471 In these arrangements, the north-south procession of the sun, indicated

by the lengthening and shortening of shadows

cast by a sun-stone at noon, was coordinated

with the diurnal east-west motion: Re is the

morning sun and also the spring sun;

Horakhty, the noon sun and also the summer

sun; Atum, the evening sun and also the

autumn sun; Khepri, the night sun and also the winter sun. 472 Khepri’s name stands for transition, the passing from one phase of

existence to another, 473 so that Khepri may be the miracle of the rising or setting disk at

the moment when half of it is in this world

and half of it in the other. 474 Other heavenly bodies were also carefully observed, if only

to assist in solar studies: “Geb, Nut, Nun,

and Naunet all sail around at the same time,”

predicting the time when the solar disk will

appear. 475 “He placed the sun in the midst of the stars, to run the seven circles of the sky,

and placed 182 [half-a-year] thrones for the

small day and 182 thrones for the great.” 476

Enoch explains the reason for all this:

knowledge of these things gives the best

possible guide to you in the future to all the

works of the Lord. 477

Figure 84. The Pharaoh Akhenaton distributes gifts from the window of appearances. Tomb of Ay, Tel el-Amarna, ca. 1340 B.C. Heavily reconstructed from

Davies, Rock Cut Tombs of El Amarna, pl. XXIX.

To be effective, such knowledge must be

highly accurate, as Enoch himself makes

clear: “I saw six gates, … each having 61

1/4 stades: I measured them with care, and

so I knew their size; by them the sun rises

and sets”; 478 the patriarch reports that he

“has measured the circle of the sun, and

numbered its rays.” 479 In the Coffin Texts,

“The enclosing of the horizon is the

numbering ( ḥsb.t) of the columns.” 480

Careful observation by day and night is

indicated, “that I behold Rēʿ when he riseth

and Atum when he setteth, that I unite with

the stars of Nut, … that I may see those who

are in the firmament.” 481 All-important is the marking of the solstice: “I set up the turning

point ( wḏb) according to the reckoning of the pillars.” 482 “I know the two acacias of turquoise between which Re emerges, as

they move with relationship ( ḥr; lit. upon, according to) the ray of Shu, toward each

eastern gate where Re will appear” (fig.

85).483 There is no reason to doubt Diodorus’s report that the Egyptians became

aware of the celestial order through

observation of the sun, moon, and stars.484

Figure 85. The large sun rises between two acacia

trees. The deceased and his ba are warmed by the god Re, as depicted by the unique wavy lines, while he worships Osiris and Isis within the shrine. P.

Djespanefer, ca. 1050 B.C. Courtesy of Cairo

Museum.

Though no two Mormon temples look

exactly alike, the concept of orientation has

always been understood: “If the strict order

of the Priesthood were carried out,” the

Prophet Joseph declared, “the first stone

would be laid at the south-east corner, by the

First Presidency of the Church. The south-

west corner should be laid next … and the

fourth, or north-east corner last. ”485

Accordingly, “we commence by laying the stone on the south- east corner,” said

Brigham Young as he set the cornerstone of

the Salt Lake Temple, “because there is the most light.” 486 And at the founding of the Manti Temple, “precisely at 12m [noon].

President Brigham Young, at whose side

stood Presidents John W. Young and Daniel

H. Wells, broke ground at the south-east

corner, and, kneeling on that particular spot,

he offered the dedicatory prayer.” 487

Precisely at noon on the southeast corner

relates time, space, and sun in the cosmic

economy of the temple.

The Temple as a Powerhouse

The purpose of the great stone complexes

was to “capture” the sun’s light as a source

of power and knowledge. 488 The concept is strikingly illustrated in the maat-stones of the temples. In cyclopean structures designed

as scale models of the universe, the huge

“pillars of heaven” were capped by maat-

stones, which directed the light of heavenly

bodies inward and downward into the

depths. 489 The maat-stones were massive slabs shaped like the maat-emblem (like a

chisel seen from the side), and so placed as

to form narrow apertures through which the

sunlight would pass along the walls of the

otherwise dark interior, in brilliant contrast

of light and darkness, 490 illuminating marked-off areas at set times, which suggests

to Westendorf the passage of the sun-god

through the underworld of the Amduat. 491

The arrangement also suggests to the same

scholar that the original office of Maat “was

to guarantee the functioning of the solar

cycle” by controlling the beams and shadows

of the temple as “Maat, the directress of the

sun’s rays. ”492 The same arrangement could be used, of course, for observation of lunar

rays and the direct observation of other celestial bodies, as Peter Tompkins has

demonstrated at great length in his

impressive book, unfortunately entitled

Secrets of the Great Pyramid.493

The priests who presided at the primitive

Egyptian “House of Life” complex were

privy to the knowledge of “‘the Power of

Re,’ … containing the thought which

conceived and organized the universe, with

the Sun as the prime mover.” 494 Commenting on the surprisingly accurate functioning of

Stonehenge as a giant computer, Gerald

Hawkins concludes, “Power and glory

would surround the priest who could predict

and thus seem to control those monstrous

events” —namely, eclipses and other signs

in the heavens. 495 Knowledge is the secret of controlling power, but it is not the source of

power—that is the sun itself. Philippe

Derchain quotes Alexandre Piankoff’s

dictum that Egyptian religion was “not a mystique but a physique, … strangely

reminiscent of the ideas of Heracleitus,” 496

explaining further that it is not the modern

kind of religion “but rather a cosmology, an

actual physical reality ( une physique

véritable), from which no one escapes or

can escape, any more than we can escape the

laws of thermodynamics.” 497 Derchain goes so far as to suggest that “one may almost

compare the Egyptian temple to a central

powerhouse where various types of energy

are converted into an electric current, or like

that control room where, by a very slight

application of effort, … the production and

distribution of energy as needed is assured

through the proper conductors. ”498 Frankfort used the same expression: “The temple, in

Egypt, was a place of power. ”499 At least in later times, according to an inscription on the

great stela of Merneptah, kings claimed to

wield the sun’s vitalizing power. 500 As the scene of the creation drama, the oldest

temple of the Egyptians was called “Place-

in-which-the-things-of-the-Earth-were-

filled-with-power.” 501 The fact that any cloud or overcast darkening the sun, far from

being welcome in sun-blasted Egypt, was

viewed as a disaster, requiring the repetition

of special hourly rites “until the shadow

turns round, ”502 shows an astonishing feeling of dependence on the sun.

Figure 86. The sun in heaven sends its rays down

upon the body on the lion couch in the tomb, thus

preserving it from decay, as the inscription

announces. BD 154, ca. 100 B.C. Redrawn; courtesy

of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

The means by which the Egyptians thought solar power was directed and controlled

betray their literal-mindedness in the matter.

The use of obelisks as lightning rods is a

very concrete example of directing awesome

power from above to a particular spot on

earth.503 The doctrine that Isis became pregnant by a bolt of lightning504 is quite in keeping with the idea of rebirth by a beam of

light in the present text (fig. 86). The medium

through which that life-giving power is

conducted is, of course, Shu, the transmitting

power of both light and air. 505

The House of Life—the original temple

complex, as Derchain describes it—was, as

Gardiner pointed out, a place humming with

power, so that any unauthorized person on

the premises would be in mortal peril of

destruction.506 The constant recurrence of two symbols in the decoration of the temples

—the ʿnḫ, symbol of life, and the wȝs,

symbol of divine power—suggests this.507

At the House of Life, all the phenomena of

the natural world were recorded and related

to human life, 508 for there were cultivated and fostered those human thought processes

which not only gave man dominion over

nature but stood guard as the assurance that

the universe, in all its vast complexity,

would continue to operate. 509

Light Penetrating the Darkness

The most impressive daily phenomenon

beheld by the observer of the heavenly

bodies is the sudden appearance of light in

darkness. Our Breathings text speaks of the person awakening when he beholds the rays

of the sun, coming to life at the very moment

“when the sun rises and shines ( wbn)” on the place where he is. It is the dramatic first ray

of sunlight penetrating the darkness that

brings the new day and the new age; and that

first ray necessarily strikes the highest point in the landscape, which is also the most

conspicuous to the dweller on the land. “O

Atum, when you came into being, you rose

up as a high hill, you shone as the Benben

stone in the temple of the Phoenix in

Heliopolis. ”510

The Hopis believe that their mesas are

special because the sun strikes them when

the rest of the desert lies in deep shadow.

Rekhmera the Egyptian felt the same way

about his own mountain: “I know that Karnak

(the temple) is the mountain of light upon

earth, the venerable hill of the first

beginning, the perfect eye of the Lord of all

things, his favorite place, which wears his

beauty and encloses his suite.” 511 The first Egyptian temple is “the Mound of the

Radiant One, … the ḏd-pillar of the Earth, the High Hill, … Behdet, … First of the

Mounds.” 512 The terrain of Egypt is

particularly favorable for brilliant displays of the light-in-darkness phenomenon. The

dead prays to “see the solar disk when he

shines upon the mountains.” 513 The first act of Pharaoh at the New Year is to mount up to

the highest point of the temple to be the first

to see the sunrise: “This god mounts up the

east stairway with his great diadem to see

his disk.” 514 For from prehistoric times the temple was thought of as a mountain: “In

Heliopolis, the Benben-stone as an obelisk

on a base had become the local equivalent of

the primeval mound, and was the place of

manifestation of Rēʿ when he arose in the

morning, it being illumined by his rays.” 515

Many have identified the pyramid also with

the primal hill, which “figures as the

birthplace and the place of first appearance

of the primal god, and the place where the

oldest god sat enthroned.” 516 In particular, the golden capstone of the pyramid, the sun-

kissed top of the mountain, through which the power of the sun and the pharaoh was

suffused upon all down below, was “the only

point of contact with the gods.” 517

Accordingly, the coronation is basically “the

appearance of the god of light upon the

primal hill,” recalling “the initiation of the

rule of the sun-god in the beginning of all

things.” 518 “Hail, Atum! Hail, Khepri! Thou art exalted as a hill ( or on the hill), thou hast arisen as the benben-stone ( or on the benben-stone) in the Benben House in

Heliopolis. ”519

The thrill of the first beam of sunlight on

the high place is, of course, the promise it

brings to all those sitting on the dark plains

below. It is when the sun comes “shining on

his mountains, … by whose eyes the earth is

illuminated,” that “the dead (in the

underworld) leap (for joy), the sleepers

awake,” for they know what is coming. 520 “A

profound symbolism has been incorporated in the architecture of the pyramids,” writes

Bleeker; “the mound of the creation” is also

“a sign of triumph over death” since it

“embodied the hope that the pharaoh might

participate in the resurrection of the sun-

god.” 521 At the sed- festival, according to the same scholar, the crown prince climbs the

primeval hill at dawn, “thus causing the day

to break” in “a sort of New Year’s Day,”

representing “the re-establishment of order

and prosperity.” 522 Shu, who as ether or light transmits the rays of life through space,

climbed the Hill of Wnn (Being), where the creator-god, Re or Amon, was born; this,

Gustave Lefebvre suggested, symbolized his

emergence from chaos and darkness, at the

same time separating Nut from Geb to

provide space between heaven and earth. 523

The new temple at Edfu was described at the

time of its dedication as “the place of the

elevation of the Lord of the Universe, the horizon of the God of the Horizon, … the

earthly stairway,” standing at “the exact spot

… designated by the ancestors in the

beginning.” 524 In the Greek mysteries of Eleusis, the initiate “climbed to the level of

the Telesterion, where a skylight was

oriented toward the east ( opaion) to face the rising sun at the twenty-second of

Boedromion [the Equinox]” (fig. 87). 525

We have noted that the benben-stone, the

prehistoric sun-stone of Heliopolis,

represented the primal hill. In the Pyramid

Texts we read, “Atum-Kheprer, thou wast

elevated on the height, brilliant as the stone

of the phoenix in the House of the Phoenix

(the benben-bird) in Heliopolis,” the

Egyptian for Heliopolis being Iwn, the On of the Bible, meaning an upright stone, the

hieroglyphic designation of Heliopolis

itself. 526 Alexandre Moret saw in the obelisk

a petrified sunbeam, just as he saw in the triangular sides of a pyramid the spreading

and descending rays of the sun. 527 Likewise, James Breasted held that the “pyramid was

the chief symbol of the sun-god,” going back

to the prehistoric benben-stone of

Heliopolis, 528 and that the king of Egypt was actually buried within the pyramid529

because pyramid, pyramidion, and obelisk

are all means of transmitting life-giving light

and power from heaven to earth. Others have

seen in the sides of the pyramid an inclined

plane or, originally, a stairway formed by the

rays of the Atum-Khepri, by which the king

mounted up to the sky. 530 At Medinet Habu at the winter solstice, a sacred love song

celebrates the union of Sokar-Osiris with the

solar disk, just as the sun strikes the top of

the obelisk. 531 In a suggestive passage, a Coffin Text reports: “I set up the columns to

mark the solstice at the temple of Atum. I

placed the male serpent ( nʿw) atop the

column of Shu, in the place in which Atum

placed the female serpent ( ʿnw.ty), when Sia was coming forth, praised as this N[N] in the

disk of Aten” 532—a reminder of the brazen serpent atop the pole in Israel, as well as the

life-restoring caduceus, though what it means

remains to be discovered.

Figure 87. The mysteries of Demeter and her

daughter were celebrated at Eleusis for more than a thousand years. After ritual purification, the

candidates traveled along the Sacred Way (A) from

Athens, entered the sanctuary complex through

magnificent gates, passed a sacred cave, and arrived at the Telesterion or Place of the Initiates (B). This huge windowless hall could hold more than three

thousand men and women. Though often enlarged

and embellished over the centuries, the original Mycenaean temple to Demeter was preserved in the

Anaktoron (C), where the sacred objects were kept.

After a night of fasting and searching, the people were shown these things by the hierophant during the epopteia or the “seeing.” The opaion (D) was a shuttered skylight that could be opened at the critical moment to flood the interior with light, creating an unforgettable experience. What was said and done

during the ceremonies has remained a secret, though it is said that the initiates returned home nobler in spirit and with a firm hope in a glorious life after death, ca. A.D. 170. Drawing based on

reconstruction model.

That miraculous ray of light that strikes the

highest point at the same moment penetrates

to the lowest. It is “the light that shineth in

the darkness” —a basic concept of the

mysteries. “Hail to you, Thoth, who was

chosen as lord in early morning. I am in

possession of Maat. (Darkness) is (my)

abomination. I (see) the light. I open the

darkness.” 533 Things were so arranged that at a set moment of the year the sun’s rays would

reach a certain object in the dark interior of the temple and thereby set things

miraculously in motion. The Egyptian funeral

texts take us to deep and dark places; the

temple, which contains the highest of heights,

must also embrace the lowest of the depths:

“Geb is the floor or groundwork and Nut is

the ceiling. It is the great god who sits

hidden in the interior of it.” 534 It is most hidden; no one knows it, no one sees it. Only

the representative ( ỉdnw) of the sun looks upon its secrets. 535 In every version of the rites, there is a point at which we are taken

into the lowest depths and deepest darkness:

“O ye gods of the duat, first cavern of the west! … I have arrived at your cave ( hp.t), having passed the štȝ.w of the duat, my disk entering into the secret places of … those

who sit in darkness.” 536

Figure 88. The sun shines upon the dead in the depths of a grave or pyramid, bringing light into darkness.

Above him, the enthroned, resurrected Osiris rides a serpent. Redrawn from mummy case of Nes Khonsu.

Courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

It has often been noted (and digging seems

to confirm it) that the oldest cult places were

caves—in mountains, naturally. 537 The mountain which is touched by the first light

is also the subterranean world within which

the king lies sleeping, the womb of earth and

place of incubation from which he and any

other initiate will be reborn (fig. 88). 538 At

this point our Breathings text has the initiate

being awakened when the sun’s rays touch

him either in the cavern, in the shrine, or on the mountain.

Figure 89. The basic structure of Egyptian temples emphasized procession along a single straight axis.

Though scholars were once puzzled that

menhirs, obelisks, pyramids, and other solar

and celestial stones were usually found at

burial places, 539 and though some see in the benben-stone of Heliopolis a sun-stone

(while others favor an earthly symbol of

procreation), 540 it is not necessary to attribute this apparent contradiction to two

separate stages of Egyptian religion (as

Bergman does)541 since the two realms belong together as naturally as two sides of a

coin.542 Indeed, Leonard Lesko notes that whether we have to do with the

“Osirinization of original solar texts” or the

reverse, or a possible switching back and

forth, the result was the same since “no

matter which religion people believed in

they would eventually share in the same

afterlife.” 543 “Therefore,” he concludes, “it does not matter which tradition or guide of

the afterlife is followed or which goal is

sought.” 544 Certainly, nothing is more natural than to put these life-giving stones at the

disposal of those who need them most—the

dead. The rising sun first touches the peak of

the primordial hill, pyramid, palace roof,

etc., yet at the same time strikes its rays into

the depths where the king lies sleeping. The

“divine phoenix” goes to the top of the

benben-stone to be resurrected at

Heliopolis, yet at Philae he repairs to the lowest of the depths for the same purpose.545

Deep in the caves of Biga, “Isis … guards

her brother in the high mountain,” while “the

great Iwny [the sun-stone of Heliopolis] on the top of the high mountain is identical with

the glorious seat upon the Abaton,” the

Abaton being the deep subterranean cave in

which Osiris slept. 546 In the Pyramid Texts,

“the good day of going to the mountain” is

also the day when “he who hastened with his

soul goes to his cave.” 547 To identify the peak of a mountain with the lowest depths of

the earth may seem paradoxical, yet this is

what we find in the pyramids, where the king

sleeps deep within the womb of the earth-

mountain which rises to heaven, the

“depository of creative energy” that is both

supernal and chthonian. 548 The embrace of the dead by the lady Nut is the embrace of

the starry heavens and the dark womb of

earth at the same time, both represented by

the pyramid, 549 for with all its exalted and heavenly nature “the Pyramid, like later

royal tombs, was considered to be the

Netherworld where the rebirth of the dead

king took place.” 550 The same paradox makes Abydos the center of both the Osiris

funeral cult and the heavenly Orion-Sirius

cult.551

Figure 90. The most famous example of light into

darkness is the huge rock-cut temple at Abu Simbel.

On the anniversary of Ramses II’s sed- festival, the sunlight penetrated 150 feet into the mountain and illuminated three statues carved in the innermost

chamber: Amon-Re, Ramses II, and Re-Horakhty, while Ptah (not a solar god) remained in the shadows, ca. 1250 B.C.

The main idea behind the arrangement of

the Egyptian temple worship, according to

Maxence de Rochemonteix, is penetration

(fig. 89), 552 especially of light into darkness:

“Thou sendest, O Re, thy glorious light into

Amenti.” 553 While the miraculous first light strikes the mountaintop, its vital power also

reaches the dead sleeping beneath the

mountain (see p. 269, fig. 88); the initiate

yearns to “see the solar disk when he shines

upon the mountains, when his light illumines

thy cavern” (fig. 90). 554 With the bringing of light, “heaven and earth unite in rejoicing”;

the temple is filled with light, and the

creative process is initiated there. 555 Upper and lower, light and dark, Shu and Tefnut, the

sun and the moon meet at the sacred benben-

stone. 556 The Sumerian temple offers the

dramatic coincidence of height and depth, 557

as does the Byzantine imagery of Bishop

Symeon of Thessalonica, describing the holy

of holies as “heaven itself and yet the earthly

paradise, … and at the same it is the

sepulchre in the deepest underworld.” 558 The temple is the place where one mounts from

the depths to the heights, where “the hill or

the stairway were the symbols of the victory

of deity over death and chaos.” 559 From the temple, writes Hippolytus, “one looks from

below upwards” to the light that comes from

above to that which is below.560 The letting of light into the inmost recesses was

dramatized daily in the Egyptian temple:

“After being purified, the priest who plays

the role of the king must … go to the crypt,

enter it, open the doors of the chambers

where he must enter, and then carry out the

daily rites before the small naos.” Passing

through a “mysterious corridor” in which “a

sacrificial rite takes place,” the officiants

reach a stairway, where “his ba is united to his statue ( bs),” which is washed, anointed, and carried up, “unveiled … and exposed to

the vivifying rays of the star which contains

his divine ba. ” When the sun strikes the

image, “all the earth dances. ”561

Figure 91. This ten-inch white limestone mace head shows the pharaoh digging a temple foundation near a

waterway, ca. 3200 B.C. Drawing made from a photograph of the mace head in the Ashmolean

Museum, Oxford. To the right, Amenhotep III strikes the doorpost of one of sixteen city gates with his white-headed mace; the privilege is also extended to his vizier. This scene is a small portion of a carved relief dedication ceremony. Reconstructed from

drawings and photographs of the temple at Soleb,

Nubia, ca. 1360 B.C.

In a more direct version, the priest or king

goes to the inner shrine or naos and knocks three (or three times four) times with a white

mace (fig. 91); then he enters and illuminates

the shrine with a holy light. 562 A New Year’s text tells how the sun “is far off in his distant

heaven; but his rays are upon his (statue)

mysteriously. Khepri comes forth early from

the duat at dawn; his full glory bursts upon the world at the House of the Apparition. …

He puts his light upon his throne ( or seat, place) when he comes forth out of Nun.” 563

The heart of the Egyptian temple, according

to Frankfort, was “a small dark room … at the end of a long road,” but that room was

also the place of light topping “the primeval

hill, … a center of immeasurable

potency.” 564 The main idea was mounting up from lower chambers by a ceremonial

stairway to final “union with the solar

disk.” 565 The climax of the Greek mysteries was the sudden shifting from dark to brilliant

light in a blinding epopsia.566 Something of this nature is indicated in the ritual use of

mirrors—the most effective device for

bringing sunlight into caves. Heinrich

Schäfer has pointed out that for the

Egyptians, ritual mirrors are designed to

represent the solar disk.567

In the lion-couch drama that we have

considered elsewhere, 568 as set forth in the complex at Opet, the king lies in the womb

of Opet in a dark chamber when the light

awakens him;569 the event is dramatized in

Coffin Text 312 and Book of the Dead 78, and the king is rescued from death and the

underworld by “a spirit of light,” which

Amon sends from heights above in the form

of the Horus-hawk. 570

The lamentations for the king on the lion-

couch bier end the moment the sunlight

touches the top of the sun-stone, making

“union with the solar disc.” 571 Just so, in the second hour of the Stundenwache, “when

Re’s rays touch the body of the god,” the

process of revival is begun.572 De Horrack renders our Breathings text, “The sun rises

on thy dwelling” instead of “cavern,” wnn, or “mansion”; 573 this is unobjectionable since in fact ỉwnn is another term for the

benben-stone of Heliopolis.

The light illuminating the dead is

especially directed to the face and eyes:

“After the sun … has illumined thy skin, its

rays unite themselves with thine eyes,” upon

which “the god awakens in peace, in weakness.” 574 As usual, the Odes of Solomon talk in the same vein as the Book of Breathings: “His rays have lifted me up; and

His light … is upon my face. I have acquired

eyes, … ears, … knowledge, … legs.” 575

The late temples, Derchain finds, “are

special edifices where the statue was

exposed ( offerte) yearly to the rays of the sun, on which life depended” 576—not only the individual but the communal life depends

on the ritual visitations of the sun’s rays to

“them that sit in darkness.”

One Hor of Thebes thus describes his own initiation: “The gates of the horizon of the

creator of the double heaven were opened to

him; initiated into the mysteries, he saw

Horus casting forth his rays. He went forth

rejoicing, jubilating to the high heavens.” 577

When “Re shines forth out of the tomb of the

god,” Horus becomes “the apple of the eye

of every god, … going forth out of the head

of Atum,” 578 the opening of the eye being the completion of awakening, in which also “the

‘eyes of the understanding’ are opened by the

light of day. … This same light overcomes

the power of darkness and chaos from which

all things come.” 579 In a festival song the king, receiving the empire of the Aton-disk,

is invited, “Come to thy house, Osiris; …

thine eyes are opened, … the storms are

driven off, the light breaks through, when thy

two eyes light up the Two Lands.” 580 In both Egypt and Greece, portrait busts of the dead

—originally funeral busts—show the person in the process of emerging from the ground,

“symbolizing the mounting up of the dead

plant toward the light. ”581 The appointments of Papyrus Salt 825 called for a central

shrine in which reposed “a small mummy of

Osiris, symbol of life”; only the sun was

authorized to look into that place, and “at the

moment the sun’s glance fell on the court …

to unite itself with Osiris, … Osiris and the

sun became united [see p. 110, fig. 26B]. …

In some places the rays of the sun revived

the mummy,” the all-important “House of

Life being a chapel of union of the god with

the sun.” 582

The symbolism of the penetration of the

light into the darkness is as much at home in

the Christian world as anywhere: “The

people which sat in darkness saw great light;

and to them which sat in the region and

shadow of death light is sprung up”

(Matthew 4:16). This is the theme of the descensus, Christ’s descent into hell, which was dramatized in the Middle Ages as the

“harrowing of hell” and of recent years has

been attracting the attention of increasing

numbers of scholars. The Egyptian Horus, as

lord of life, visits Rostau to inspect it, going

up and down and comforting the inhabitants

with his presence. 583 In the Book of the Two Ways, the deceased himself goes down in the

bark of Re to “[lighten] the darkness” —nay,

to “dazzle” it.584 The theme of the Amduat is the god of light passing through the

underworld, bringing life and hope to those

who dwell there. In the eighth hour, at the

command of the sun-god, the gates of hell

spring open so that the light can break

through into the darkness. The images of the

gods become visible, and the voices of the

dead souls beginning to join with their

bodies that are stirring to life answer him

from the cavernous depths with a humming, buzzing, confused, incoherent chorus of

animal-like noises. 585

Though “the idea that the sun ‘awakens’

the dead on his entry into the other world is

not often formally expressed” in the Egyptian

texts, 586 it is clearly indicated in our snsn writing, as in a Denderah inscription in

which the sun causes one to “see with her

eyes, hear with her ears, and to walk

forward” as, “penetrating mystically by the

apertures of the temple to the statue hidden in

the darkness of the sanctuary at the heart of

the sealed naos, the sun unites itself with the

divine image and the cosmic return of the

light. ”587 When the sun comes “shining on the mountains, … the earth is illuminated,” and

“the dead leap (for joy), the sleepers awake,

the dead start looking for something to

eat.” 588 The individual claims the visitor’s attention: “Thou shinest upon my body, thou

illuminest my sarcophagus, … thou openest to me the prisons of Agert, thou openest to

me the gates of the duat, I go out and enter (when I please).” 589 Thus the visitor addresses the guardian serpent at the gates:

“I have arrived at your hole while traversing

the mysteries of the duat in order to bring the light of my disk into the mysterious place to

enlighten those who sit in darkness.” 590 It will be recalled that in the harrowing-of-hell

drama, the Lord is challenged at the gates of

hell by Death and Hell, but he smashes the

gates and preaches to the inhabitants of the

underworld, converts them, has the apostles

baptize them, and leads them up out of the

lower world to realms above in a triumphal

procession, with Adam at the head. 591 This is also the concept of the parousia, when the king visits his subjects while going from

place to place on his royal progress, letting

his countenance shine ( wbn ȝḫw) among them

and bestowing the blessing of heaven upon them until it is time to go; wherever he

comes, there is jubilation and official

holiday at his approach and sorrow and

patient waiting after his departure. Even so,

the sun’s parousia in the underworld brings only too brief joy: “He comes! He comes!

(they say) in the mounds, the inhabitants of

the duat, they worship him; … they acclaim him in the place of silence, even of the dead.

… The dead leap (for joy); the sleepers

awake. … We share in his beauties … (when

he comes) shining on his mountains. ”592 The visiting god brings light and hope to them

who sit in darkness, and with his passing the

gates clang shut and those left behind in the

dark sorrowfully resign themselves to

awaiting his return.593 Like the Lord among the disobedient spirits, the god teaches those

whom he visits: “Osiris crosses the water to

them, … then he teaches them, the

Enlightened Ones, in that place. … He assigns them their positions.” 594 “The great god comes in his ship and stays awhile in

this place, imparting instructions to Osiris

and to those who are with him.” 595 “He teaches them, and they live when he calls out

to them. He gives them water and the breath

of his utterance.” 596 At the New Year “they give him the gifts of the year with their

hands. This great god then instructs them;

they hail him and they live by the words and

voice of this great god. Their throats breathe

air when he addresses them. He instructs

them in their duties, and he gives them green

plants that are in their fields.” 597

It will be noticed that with light and

enlightenment, he also gives them the breath

of life. In our Breathings text, “Thou

awakenest daily beholding the rays of the

sun, when Amon comes to thee bearing the

breath(s) of life” (lines 38–39). At the wag-

festival one prays, “May the solar disk shine upon my breast, may its rays illuminate my

cavern. … May I breathe the wind that issues

from you, the north wind that issues (from)

Nut. ”598 “When you illume the earth in its darkness, you assuage the sorrow of Osiris;

they who are below breathe the breath [of

life], they cry out to you in acclamation. ”599

“O ye gods of the duat. … Your throats

breathe when you hear the words of

Osiris.” 600 The ultimate curse of the damned is that “they may not snsn the air, nor ever have progeny, nor see the rays of Aton,” the

three worst things that can befall one, while

the chosen of Osiris are so blessed that “the

rays of Itn (the sun’s disk) fall upon their

corpses every day.” 601

Re himself is awakened to new life when

Nefertem holds a lotus to his nose to start

him breathing just at sunrise. 602 The rites of the House of Life are primarily to overcome

“suffocation.” 603 Light and air, conveyed by Shu, are the life-giving principles that

fertilize the womb, the ba of the god passing through the respiratory organs to the heart

bearing the seed of life. 604 Light comes as

“the messenger of heaven and earth,”

“bringing breath ( snsn) to the nose” of the dead. 605 As the sun crosses the horizon, going up or down, the officiant in the temple

cries out, “Heaven is reunited to the earth!”

four times, and the women call, “The joy of

heaven is upon the earth!” also four times; to

which the officiant replies, “The god comes;

pay homage!” four times, after which they

chant together: “Our Lord is in his house; he

has nothing more to fear!” 606

The Sun-God in the Underworld

In the hymn of Akhenaton, “where the rays

of the sun-god … penetrate, the locked doors

spring open and the darkness is driven

out.” 607 The opening of the house is the climax of the New Year’s procession: “I

have opened the two doors of heaven; I have

opened the (2) gates of earth. I travel in thy

heaven. … I am the winds within you.” 608

They are joyful in anticipation of delivery:

“Light is on the faces of those who are the

members of Osiris. Ye shall not hold captive

my soul. Ye shall not keep in durance my

shadow. The way is open to my soul and to

my shadow. It seeth the great god in the

shrine on the day of counting souls.” 609 An Enoch apocryphon tells us that the Sun in his

car passes through the seven hours of

darkness, then, just as he rises at the eighth

hour he is crowned by four hundred angels

as all creatures sing a welcoming hymn: “He

who brings the light has come! ”610 The highest state to which an initiate could attain

was that of epopteia, face-to-face

confrontation with the light, 611 recalling that

when Moses confronted God he became himself “Moses with the Shining Face.” 612

No legend is more widespread in the

Christian world than that of the Seven

Sleepers, who slept in a cave within a

mountain until awakened by a ray of light.613

The one great concern of the dead and the

main purpose of the funerary rites, according

to Paul Barguet, was to be “constantly under

the life-giving rays of the sun, … the goal of

complete identity with Re. … Everything is

reducible to the solarization of the dead.” 614

The Epistle to Rheginos, or Treatise on the Resurrection, carries on the tradition in the Christian but still Egyptian sphere: “We have

suffered with him, been raised with him, and

mounted to heaven with him. But if we are

manifest in the world having put on Christ,

we are the rays of Christ, embraced by him

until we lie down.” 615 Aside from all mystery, the return of the sun is a very real

experience; there is a Jewish tradition that Adam, at the time of the fall, despaired in

darkness, thinking all was lost, but then was

amazed to see that the sun rose up again in

his new world on the following morning, and

from that “he rejoiced that this is the law of

the world, that day follows night and man is

given another chance to make good.” 616

Notes

1. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd rev. ed.

(Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1957), 247–48 §323.

2. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of Opening the Mouth (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1909), 1:155, 176.

3. Eberhard Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1960), 2:11, 73 (scene 22), quotation on 73.

4. Joachim Spiegel, “Das Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” ASAE 53 (1956): 408.

5. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride (Of Isis and Osiris) 10.

6. Claas J. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals: Enactments of Religious Renewal (Leiden: Brill, 1967), 89.

7. Walter Federn, “The ‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts: A New Approach,” JNES 19 (1960): 251.

8. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 3.

9. Bruno H. Stricker, “De Egyptische mysteriën: Pap.

Leiden T 32,” OMRO 37 (1956): 51.

10. Firmicus Maternus, De errore profanarum religionum (The Error of the Pagan Religions) 12.7, 9.

11. Dieter Müller, “I Am Isis,” review of Ich bin Isis, by Jan Bergman, OLZ 67 (1972): 121.

12. Siegfried Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,”

ZÄS 99 (1972): 20.

13. Wolfgang Helck, “Bemerkungen zum Ritual des Dramatischen Ramesseumspapyrus,” Or 23 (1954): 410–11.

14. Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zu altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Das “Denkmal memphitischer

Theologie” der Schabakostein des Britischen

Museums (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928), 17.

15. Iamblichus, De mysteriis (Of the Mysteries) 7.1, in Theodor Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis

aegyptiacae (Bonn: Marcus and Weber, 1922), 501.

16. Iamblichus, Of the Mysteries 3.15.

17. Plotinus, Enneades 5.8.6; Gertrud Thausing, Sein und Werden: Versuch einer Ganzheitsschau der Religion des Pharaonenreiches (Vienna: Stiglmayr, 1971), 171.

18. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:3.

19. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis 19: Mystagogica 1.1, in PG 33:1065.

20. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 17–18.

21. Siegfried Schott, Mythe und Mythenbildung im alten

Ägypten (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1945), 30–31.

22. Schott, Mythe und Mythenbildung im alten Ägypten, 29.

23. Hellmut Brunner, “Zum Verständnis der archaisierenden Tendenzen in der ägyptischen Spätzeit,” Saeculum 21

(1970): 159.

24. Brunner, “Zum Verständnis der archaisierenden Tendenzen,” 159.

25. PT 577 §§1521–23, in Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 23.

26. Hermann Kees, “Die Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” ZÄS 78 (1942): 44.

27. P. Leiden T 32 7/2–6, in Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 37 (1956): 58.

28. P. Leiden T 32 7/7–8, in Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 37 (1956): 58.

29. The same are found, for example, in P. Leiden T 32 3/31, in Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34 (1953): 20.

30. These combinations have been treated in Hugh W.

Nibley, “The Expanding Gospel,” BYU Studies 7/1

(1965): 3–27, reprinted in Temple and Cosmos: Beyond This Ignorant Present, CWHN 12:177–211.

31. For example, CT 79, in Adriaan de Buck, The Egyptian Coffin Texts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935–61), 2:23–25.

32. E. A. E. Reymond, review of Le temple d’Esna: Esna III, by Serge Sauneron, BiOr 28 (1971): 320.

33. E. A. E. Reymond, The Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1969), 47.

34. Erik Hornung, “Politische Planung und Realität im alten Ägypten,” Saeculum 22 (1971): 52.

35. Henri Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods: A Study of Ancient Near Eastern Religion as the Integration of Society and Nature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948), 150.

36. Yigael Yadin, The Scroll of the War of the Sons of Light against the Sons of Darkness, trans. Batya Rabin and Chaim Rabin (Oxford: Oxford University

Press, 1962), 202–3.

37. Th. Zielinski, “Hermes und die Hermetik,” Archiv für Religionswissenschaft 8 (1905): 324.

38. Herman te Velde, “Some Remarks on the Structure of Egyptian Divine Triads,” JEA 57 (1971): 80.

39. Jean-Claude Goyon, Le Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279

(Cairo: IFAO, 1966), 63–64, emphasis added.

40. Alexandre Piankoff, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon (New York: Pantheon, 1955), 43.

41. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 49–50, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 51–54, 71–72.

42. P. Leiden I 350 4/21–22, in Alan H. Gardiner, “Hymns to Amon from a Leiden Papyrus,” ZÄS 42 (1905): 35.

43. Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zu altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Der dramatische

Ramesseumpapyrus: Ein Spiel zur Thronbesteigung

des Königs (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928), 96.

44. Cited in Erik Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971), 47; English trans., Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many, trans. John Baines (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1982), 57–58.

45. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 88; English trans., 96–97.

46. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 89; English trans., 97.

47. BD 17, in E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Dead: The Papyrus of Ani, Scribe and Treasurer of the Temples of Egypt, about B.C. 1450 (New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1913), 2:376–78; 3: pl. 7.

48. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 90; English trans., 99.

49. Jan Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 158–59.

50. Te Velde, “Remarks on the Structure of Egyptian Divine Triads,” 81–82.

51. Re and Isis 133:10, in Günther Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten (Jena: Diederichs, 1915), 141.

52. Te Velde, “Remarks on the Structure of Egyptian Divine Triads,” 81.

53. P. Sensaos 1–2, in Bruno H. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” OMRO 23 (1942): 37.

54. Heinrich K. Brugsch, Religion und Mythologie der

alten Ägypter nach den Denkmälern (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1891), 231–80, esp. 236–37.

55. George Nagel, “Un papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire (Louvre 3292 [inv.]),” BIFAO 29 (1929): 100–101.

56. Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 68.

57. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 22.

58. P. Sensaos 2, in Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 37.

59. Joachim Spiegel, Das Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1971), 79.

60. CT 160, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:385.

61. CT 162, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:393–94.

62. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:359–60.

63. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:40.

64. CT 132, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:152.

65. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:376–77.

66. PT 222 §199, in Schott, Mythe und Mythenbildung im alten Ägypten, 19.

67. Gustave Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes (Neuchâtel: Baconnière, 1946), 113.

68. PT 606 §1695, in Schott, Mythe und Mythenbildung im alten Ägypten, 20.

69. Rudolf Anthes, “Egyptian Theology in the Third Millennium B.C.,” JNES 18 (1959): 210, emphasis added.

70. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:39.

71. Hans Bonnet, Reallexikon der ägyptischen

Religionsgeschichte, 2nd ed. (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971), 400.

72. Short Amduat, fourth hour, line 82, in Erik Hornung, Das Amduat: Die Schrift des verborgenen Raumes

(Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1963–67), 3:29.

73. PT 222 §§212–13, in Schott, Mythe und Mythenbildung im alten Ägypten, 19–20.

74. Auguste Mariette, Catalogue général des monuments d’Abydos (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1869–80), 1:51

lines 44–45, cited in Piankoff, Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, 43.

75. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 186.

76. Hornung, “Politische Planung und Realität im alten Ägypten,” 52.

77. Kurt Sethe, “Beiträge zur Geschichte Amenophis’ IV.,”

in Nachrichten der Königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, philologisch-historische Klasse, 1921 (Berlin: Weidmanns, 1921), 120, cited in Battiscombe Gunn, “Notes on the Aten and His Names,” JEA 9 (1923): 175.

78. Eugène Lefébure, “Le Cham et l’Adam égyptiens,”

Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archaeology 9

(1893): 176.

79. Alexandre Moret, Histoire de l’orient (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1936), 209 and n. 32.

80. Moret, Histoire de l’orient, 209 n. 34.

81. Spiegel, Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 2.

82. Rudolf Anthes, “Zum Ursprung des Nefertem,” ZÄS 80

(1955): 86; Rudolf Anthes, “Atum, Nefertem und die Kosmogonien von Heliopolis: Ein Versuch,” ZÄS 82

(1958): 1–8; and Anthes, “Egyptian Theology in the Third Millennium B.C.,” 177.

83. PT 587 §1587; CT 132, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:152.

84. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:372–76.

85. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 63–64.

86. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:374–75.

87. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 66.

88. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 65.

89. Alan H. Gardiner, Late-Egyptian Stories (Brussels: FERE, 1932), 1–9.

90. Gustave Lefebvre, “Textes du tombeau de Petosiris,”

ASAE 20 (1920): 230.

91. PT 222 §207c, in Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 370.

92. Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 54; cf.

CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:386–88; PT 401 §697a–b.

93. CT 148, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:224–25.

94. Shabako stone, lines 59–61, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 68.

95. Shabako stone, line 58, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 66.

96. Shabako stone, lines 49a–51a, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 47.

97. Lefebvre, “Textes du tombeau de Petosiris,” 230.

98. Ahmad Mohamad Badawi, Der Gott Chnum (Hamburg: Augustin, 1937), 52‒58, quotation on 53.

99. Arthur E. P. Weigall, “Miscellaneous Notes,” ASAE 11

(1911): 173 and fig. 6.

100. Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 68.

101. Shabako stone, line 52b, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 46–47.

102. Maj Sandman Holmberg, The God Ptah (Lund: Gleerup, 1946), 8–11.

103. H. R. Hall, review of De Egyptische Voorstellingen betreffende den Oerheuvel, by Adriaan de Buck, JEA 10 (1924): 187.

104. Hermann Junker, Die politische Lehre von Memphis (Berlin: Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1941), 7–8.

105. Shabako stone, line 3, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 21.

106. Shabako stone, line 58, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 66.

107. Hermann Junker, Die Götterlehre von Memphis (Schabaka-Inschrift) (Berlin: Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1940), 19, emphasis added.

108. Holmberg, God Ptah, 270.

109. Cf. P. Leiden I 350 5/22–23, in Gardiner, “Hymns to Amon from a Leiden Papyrus,” 39.

110. Cf. P. Leiden I 350 4/6–8, in Gardiner, “Hymns to Amon from a Leiden Papyrus,” 31–32.

111. P. Leiden I 350 4/2, in Gardiner, “Hymns to Amon from

a Leiden Papyrus,” 31–32.

112. Cf. P. Leiden I 350 4/13–14, in Gardiner, “Hymns to Amon from a Leiden Papyrus,” 33–34; cf. 40–41.

113. Helmer Ringgren, “Light and Darkness in Ancient Egyptian Religion,” in Liber Amicorum: Studies in Honour of Professor Dr. C. J. Bleeker (Leiden: Brill, 1969), 141–42.

114. George Foucart, “La belle fête de la vallée,” BIFAO 24

(1924): 147–48; Gerald A. Wainwright, “Some Aspects of Amūn,” JEA 20 (1934): 139–53.

115. Étienne Drioton, “Amon, refuge du coeur,” ZÄS 79

(1954): 3–11.

116. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 214–16; English trans., 218–20.

117. P. Leiden I 350, in Gardiner, “Hymns to Amon from a Leiden Papyrus,” 22; Theodor Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris (Prague: Orientalisches Institut, 1941), 2:84–85.

118. Rudolf Anthes, “Die Maat des Echnaton von Amarna,”

Journal of the American Oriental Society, Suppl. 14

(1952): 34.

119. Alexandre Moret, Le rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 91.

120. George Daressy, “Statues de basse époque du Musée de Gizèh,” RT 15 (1893): 154–55.

121. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 99; English trans., 107–8.

122. Klaus Koch, “Wort und Einheit des Schöpfergottes in

Memphis und Jerusalem: Zur Einzigartigkeit Israels,”

Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche 62 (1965): 260.

123. Philippe Derchain, Le Papyrus Salt 825 (B. M.

10051): Rituel pour la conservation de la vie en Égypte (Brussels: Palais des Académies, 1965), 1:89.

124. Adolf Erman, Der Leidener Amonshymnus (Berlin: Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1923), 72–

73.

125. P. Berlin 3135 1/21, in Georg Möller, Hieratische Lesestücke für den akademischen Gebrauch (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1927–35), 3:32.

126. Cf. Jacques J. Clère, “Un passage de la stèle du général Antef,” BIFAO 30 (1931): 427.

127. Alexandre Piankoff, The Pyramid of Unas (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1968), 10, cited in Hartwig Altenmüller, review of The Pyramid of Unas, by Alexandre Piankoff, BiOr 26 (1969): 61.

128. P. Skrine, in Aylward M. Blackman, “The Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” JEA 4 (1917): 123–24.

129. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 128.

130. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 124.

131. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 126.

132. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 128.

133. P. Louvre N. 3292 I/6, 17–18, in Nagel, “Papyrus

funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 46–47. The text to which it is a companion is Philippe-Jacques de

Horrack, “Le Livre des Respirations d’après les

manuscrits du Musée du Louvre,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Philippe Virey and Gaston Maspero, BE 17 (Paris: Leroux, 1907), 119.

134. Philippe Derchain, Rites égyptiens, I: Le sacrifice de l’oryx (Brussels: FERE, 1962), 30–32.

135. Jan Bergman, Ich bin Isis: Studien zum memphitischen Hintergrund der griechischen

Isisaretalogien (Uppsala: Berlingska, 1968), 203.

136. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 204.

137. Gaballa A. Gaballa and Kenneth A. Kitchen, “The Festival of Sokar,” Or 38 (1969): 42.

138. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 420–

22; PT 256 §303.

139. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 379.

140. Émile Chassinat, “Le livre de protéger la barque divine,” RT 16 (1894): 105–22.

141. P. Louvre N. 3129, in Siegfried Schott, Urkunden mythologischen Inhalts (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929).

142. Elizabeth Thomas, “Terrestrial Marsh and Solar Mat,”

JEA 45 (1959): 38.

143. Berlin Stela 1204, 18–23, in Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 30.

144. In Max Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos: Ein Beitrag zur ägyptischen Religions- und Literaturgeschichte (Leipzig: Hinrichs,

1929), 22 §13 lines 15–16.

145. P. Bremner-Rhind 23/21–22; 24/4–5, 12, 17, 22–23, in Raymond O. Faulkner, The Papyrus Bremner-Rhind (British Museum No. 10188) (Brussels: FERE, 1933), 48–51, describes the combat.

146. P. Ramesseum B 21–24, in Sethe, Dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus, 124.

147. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 122–24.

148. Reinhard Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1970), 91; CT 48, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:211–12.

149. Cited in Gertrud Thausing and Traudl Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch

(Papyrus Reinisch) der Papyrussammlung der

Österreichischen Nationalbibliothek (Cairo: Österreichisches Kulturinstituts, 1969), 27–29.

150. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 77, 81.

151. Paul Barguet, review of The Pyramid of Unas: Texts Translated with Commentary, by Alexandre Piankoff, RHR 177 (1970): 69.

152. I. E. S. Edwards, The Pyramids of Egypt, 3rd ed.

(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1985), 13–14; cf. Jaroslav Černý, “A Note on the Recently Discovered Boat of

Cheops,” JEA 41 (1955): 75–79.

153. Étienne Drioton, Le texte dramatique d’Edfou (Cairo: IFAO, 1948), 117–18.

154. Siegfried Schott, Das schöne Fest vom Wüstentale:

Festbräuche einer Totenstadt (Wiesbaden: Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur in Mainz, 1952), 855–56.

155. For more on Nekhbet, see above, commentary to line 13, pp. 161–64.

156. Alan H. Gardiner, “The Goddess Nekhbet at the Jubilee Festival of Rameses III,” ZÄS 48 (1910): 49.

157. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 18.

158. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 16.

159. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 123–24, 126.

160. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 21.

161. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 42.

162. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 61.

163. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 139.

164. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 42.

165. Foucart, “Belle fête de la vallée,” 2–3.

166. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata 5.7.41.3, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 371.

167. Siegfried Schott, Die Schrift der verborgenen Kammer in Königsgräbern der 18. Dynastie

(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1958), 359; see also Hugh W. Nibley, “Qumran and ‘The Companions of the Cave,’” Revue de Qumran 5 (1965): 192–94, reprinted in Old Testament and Related Studies, CWHN 1:266–67.

168. Rudolf Anthes, “Die Sonnenboote in den Pyramidentexten,” ZÄS 82 (1958): 77–89.

169. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 27.

170. CT 162, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:403–4.

171. CT 151 (ms B1Bo), in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:257–59.

172. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:19.

173. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:44–54.

174. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 53–54; English trans., 63–64.

175. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 30; English trans., 42 (footnote to Breasted omitted in translation).

176. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 49; English trans., 59–60.

177. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 44; English trans., 55.

178. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 43.

179. Siegfried Morenz, “Zur Vergöttlichung in Ägypten,”

ZÄS 84 (1959): 135.

180. Morenz, “Zur Vergöttlichung in Ägypten,” 136.

181. Morenz, “Zur Vergöttlichung in Ägypten,” 136–38.

182. Eberhard Otto, “Altägyptische Zeitvorstellungen und Zeitbegriffe,” Die Welt als Geschichte 14 (1954): 146.

183. Otto, “Altägyptische Zeitvorstellungen und Zeitbegriffe,” 145–46.

184. Louis V. Žabkar, “Some Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition of the Book of the Dead,” JNES 24 (1965): 78, 83.

185. Žabkar, “Some Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition,”

79.

186. Abd el-Moḥsen Bakir, “Nḥḥ and ḏt Reconsidered,”

JEA 39 (1953): 110‒11, quotation on 110.

187. Étienne Drioton, “Les dédicaces de Ptolémée Évergète II sur le deuxième pylône de Karnak,” ASAE 44 (1944): 151, cited in Žabkar, “Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition,” 77.

188. László Kákosy, “Zu einer Etymologie von Philä: Die

‘Insel der Zeit,’” Acta Antiqua 16 (1968): 46–47.

189. Gardiner, “Hymns to Amon from a Leiden Papyrus,” 18

n. 2.

190. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:379–80; 3: pl. 7.

191. Otto, “Altägyptische Zeitvorstellungen und Zeitbegriffe,” 146.

192. Gertrud Thausing, “Die Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” in Mélanges Maspero, ed. Pierre Jouguet (Cairo: IFAO, 1935–38), 38.

193. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 171; English trans., 176.

194. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 178; English trans., 183.

195. Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 37.

196. Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 38.

197. Kurt Sethe, Übersetzung und Kommentar zu den altägyptischen Pyramidentexten (Hamburg: Augustin, 1962), 2:241, in Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 38.

198. Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 38.

199. Otto, “Altägyptische Zeitvorstellungen und Zeitbegriffe,” 145.

200. Žabkar, “Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition,” 78.

201. Žabkar, “Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition,” 83.

202. Eberhard Otto, Gott und Mensch nach den ägyptischen Tempelinschriften der griechisch-römischen Zeit: Eine Untersuchungen zur

Phraseologie der Tempelinschriften (Heidelberg: Winter, 1964), 93–94.

203. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:37.

204. Otto, Gott und Mensch, 93.

205. Otto, Gott und Mensch, 92.

206. Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 35–

38.

207. Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 37.

208. Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 41.

209. Žabkar, “Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition,” 79.

210. Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 35–

36.

211. Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 41.

212. Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 37.

213. De Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” 119.

214. Jan Zandee, Death as an Enemy: According to Ancient Egyptian Conceptions, trans. Mrs. W. F.

Klasens (Leiden: Brill, 1960), 14.

215. PT 422 §764.

216. Gertrud Thausing, Der Auferstehungsgedanke in ägyptischen religiösen Texten (Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 1943), 5.

217. PT 601 §§1660–61.

218. Eugène Lefébure, “L’importance du nom chez les Égyptiens,” and “La vertu et la vie du nom en Égypte,”

in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 36 (Paris: Leroux, 1915), 3:47–67, 95–126; and Albrecht Alt,

“Menschen ohne Namen,” ArOr 18/1 (1950): 9–24.

219. Georges Posener, “Les criminels débaptisés et les mort sans noms,” RdE 5 (1946): 51–56.

220. Eugène Lefébure, “Un chapitre de la chronique solaire,” ZÄS 21 (1883): 27–33.

221. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:227–28.

222. Re and Isis 132:11, in Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 139.

223. Re and Isis 132:1, 11; 133:6–10, in Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 138–41.

224. Re and Isis 133:11, in Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 141.

225. P. Leiden I 350 1/3; 4/12–21, in Gardiner, “Hymns to Amon from a Leiden Papyrus,” 14–15, 33–35.

226. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:85.

227. BD 125A, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 31.

228. Lefébure, “La vertu et la vie du nom en Égypte,” 115.

229. Gospel of Philip II, 54, 15–31.

230. Raymond O. Faulkner, A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1962), 148.

231. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 577.

232. Heinrich Brugsch, Thesaurus inscriptionum aegyptiacarum (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1883–91), 1190.

233. Wb 4:49–50.

234. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 156; English trans., 162–63.

235. Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca (Library) 1.51, in Richard Lepsius, Älteste Texte des Todtenbuches nach Sarkophagen des Altägyptischen Reichs im Berliner Museum (Berlin: Hertz, 1867), 53.

236. Hornung, “Politische Planung und Realität im alten Ägypten,” 54.

237. Hornung, “Politische Planung und Realität im alten Ägypten,” 57.

238. Hornung, “Politische Planung und Realität im alten Ägypten,” 52.

239. CT 98, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:93.

240. CT 107, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:119.

241. CT 148, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:223.

242. CT 146, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:204–5.

243. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 124; English trans., 134–35.

244. P. Salt 825 3/9–4/2, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:4*.

245. Wb 3:454.

246. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:355–61.

247. Severus, Epistle 101, in PO 14:246–47; and 3 Nephi 19:30.

248. Otto, Gott und Mensch, 54.

249. De Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” 121.

250. Gardiner, Egpytian Grammar, 172.

251. Aylward M. Blackman, “Libations to the Dead in Modern Nubia and Ancient Egypt,” JEA 3 (1916): 32, emphasis added.

252. Wb 1:529.

253. Thausing, Der Auferstehungsgedanke in ägyptischen religiösen Texten, 6.

254. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:192.

255. Aylward M. Blackman, “The King of Egypt’s Grace before Meat,” JEA 31 (1945): 59.

256. Blackman, “King of Egypt’s Grace before Meat,” 57–

73.

257. Hermann Kees, Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝt,’” RT 36 (1914): 10–12.

258. CT 179, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:65–67.

259. For example, CT 173, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:52–55; and CT 194, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:112.

260. For more on the waters of cleansing or passage, see above, commentary to line 12, pp. 151–52.

261. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:33.

262. Aylward M. Blackman, “The Rite of Opening the Mouth in Ancient Egypt and Babylonia,” JEA 10 (1924): 59.

263. Hermann Kees, Ägypten, vol. 10 of Religionsgeschichtliches Lesebuch, ed. Alfred Bertholet (Tübingen: Mohr, 1928), 43.

264. Alfred Adam, “Ein vergessener Aspekt des frühchristlichen Herrenmahles: Ein Beitrag zur

Geschichte des Abendmahlsverständnisses der alten Kirche,” Theologische Literaturzeitung 88 (1963): 9–

20.

265. Henri Frankfort, Ancient Egyptian Religion (1948; reprint, New York: Harper, 1961), 90.

266. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 1:242.

267. Hans O. Lange, “Die Ägypter,” in Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte, ed. Pierre D. Chantepie de la Saussaye, Alfred Bertholet, and Edvard Lehmann

(Tübingen: Mohr, 1925), 1:469.

268. Louis Speleers, “La résurrection et la toilette du mort selon les Textes des Pyramides,” RdE 3 (1938): 65.

269. CT 190, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:98.

270. Otto, Gott und Mensch, 84.

271. Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 162.

272. CT 188, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:92–93.

273. CT 192, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:105–8.

274. CT 187–88, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:91–

92.

275. CT 187, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:89.

276. CT 194, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:112.

277. Cf. Hermann Junker, Die Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien nach den Inschriften von Dendera, Edfu und Philae (Vienna: Hölder, 1910), 44.

278. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 8–9.

279. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 72.

280. CT 188, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:93.

281. See Georg Möller, Hieratische Paläographie (Leipzig:

Hinrichs, 1927–36), no. 391; BD 110 in Richard Lepsius, Das Todtenbuch der Ägypter nach dem

hieroglyphischen Papyrus in Turin (Leipzig: Wigand, 1842), pl. XLI.

282. CT 189, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:96–97.

283. CT 188, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:94.

284. CT 188, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:95.

285. Ignatius, Epistola ad Smyrnaeans (Epistle to the Smyrnaeans) 3.1–3.

286. Gustave Lefebvre, “Une table eucharistique,” ASAE 25

(1925): 160–62.

287. Ignatius, Epistola ad Ephesios (Epistle to the Ephesians) 20.2.

288. Diodorus, Library 1.25.6.

289. 1QSa II, 17–20.

290. Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du mort,” 38.

291. Winfried Barta, “Das Opferritual im täglichen Tempelkult,” JEOL 6/19 (1965–66): 457–61.

292. Augustine, Enarratio in Psalmum (Narrations on Psalms) 88.2.5, in PL 37:1134.

293. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 231.

294. Wilhem Spiegelberg, “Der ägyptische Name von Pelusium,” ZÄS 49 (1911): 81–82.

295. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 1:216.

296. Morenz, “Zur Vergöttlichung in Ägypten,” 138.

297. Hermann Kees, Ägypten, vol. 1 of Kulturgeschichte des alten Orients (Munich: Beck, 1933), 196–97.

298. Blackman, “King of Egypt’s Grace before Meat,” 71.

299. Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 62.

300. BD 136, in Lepsius, Todtenbuch der Ägypter, pl. LVI.

301. Bertil E. Gärtner, The Temple and the Community in Qumran and the New Testament: A Comparative

Study in the Temple Symbolism of the Qumran Texts and the New Testament (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1965), 2–3.

302. Gärtner, Temple and the Community in Qumran, 11.

303. CT 186, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:85–86, in which the temple is the midway place.

304. CT 192, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:104–6; cf. CT 187, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:89.

305. Cf. Shabako stone, line 56, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 60.

306. PT 670 §1975b.

307. P. Sȩkowski 12/3, in Albertyna Szczudłowska,

“Liturgical Text Preserved on Sȩkowski Papyrus,” ZÄS

98 (1970): 55.

308. Epistle of Barnabas 6.11, 16.

309. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:55.

310. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:69–70

(scene 17).

311. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:40.

312. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 81.

313. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 80.

314. Siegfried Schott, Die Reinigung Pharaos in einem memphitischen Tempel (Berlin P 13 242) (Göttingen:

Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1957), 60–62.

315. Schott, Reinigung Pharaos, 52, 62–63.

316. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 40; cf. Maurice Mehauden, “Le secret central de l’initiation aux Mystères d’Eleusis,” in Initiation, ed. Claas J.

Bleeker (Leiden: Brill, 1965), 65.

317. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:32.

318. Alexandre Moret, Mystères égyptiens (Paris: Colin, 1913), esp. 55.

319. Wolfgang Helck, “Die Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” ArOr 20 (1952): 78.

320. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:54

(scene 9).

321. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:12, 52–

53 (scene 8), 55–56 (scene 10).

322. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:55.

323. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 1:22–24; 2:53–54.

324. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:56–57.

325. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:59.

326. Helck, “Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” 78.

327. S. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne: Compléments à la religion égyptienne (Athens: BAOA, 1957), 220.

328. Helck, “Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” 78.

329. Mircea Eliade, “L’initiation et le monde moderne,” in Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 3.

330. Karl Kerényi, “Voraussetzungen der Einweihung in

Elensis,” in Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 60.

331. Moret’s translation cited in Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 220–21.

332. S. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire de l’anté-diluvien à Sumer-Babylone: La familiarité divine originelle (Athens: BAOA, 1961), 422.

333. Alexander Altmann, “The Gnostic Background of the Rabbinic Adam Legends,” JQR, n.s., 35 (1944–45): 390–91.

334. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp.

Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938), 305.

335. Altmann, “Gnostic Background of the Rabbinic Adam Legends,” 389.

336. Altmann, “Gnostic Background of the Rabbinic Adam Legends,” 391.

337. Discourse on Abbatôn 14a–15b, in E. A. Wallis Budge, Coptic Martyrdoms, etc., in the Dialect of Upper Egypt (1914; reprint, New York: AMS, 1977), 235–36.

338. CT 149, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:233–34.

339. Discourse on Abbatôn 14a–15b, 21a–b, in Budge, Coptic Martyrdoms, 235–36, 240.

340. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 425.

341. Adriaan de Buck, “The Dramatic Text,” in The Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, ed. Henri Frankfort (London: Egypt Exploration Society, 1933), 1:82.

342. Adriaan de Buck, “The Earliest Version of Book of the Dead 78,” JEA 35 (1949): 87.

343. De Buck, “Dramatic Text,” 1:82.

344. De Buck, “Dramatic Text,” 1:84–85, lines 16–18.

345. De Buck, “Dramatic Text,” 1:85, lines 19–24.

346. De Buck, “Dramatic Text,” 1:85–86, lines 25, 37.

347. De Buck, “Dramatic Text,” 1:85, lines 30–31 and n. 45.

348. De Buck, “Dramatic Text,” 1:86, lines 40–42.

349. De Buck, “Dramatic Text,” 1:85, line 19.

350. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2: illustration 1.

351. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2: illustration 1 (scenes 9–10).

352. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2: illustration 1 (scenes 14, 32–75).

353. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2: 55–57

and illustration 1 (scene 10).

354. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:60–62

and illustration 1 (scene 12).

355. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:69.

356. P. Ramesseum B 34–36, in Sethe, Dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus, 139 and 124–25; cf. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:31–33.

357. Francis Ll. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis: The Sethon of Herodotus and the Demotic Tales of Khamuas (Oxford: Clarendon, 1900), 20–21, 90–93.

358. Genesis 28:12; Altmann, “Gnostic Background of the

Rabbinic Adam Legends,” 390.

359. Apocalypse of Adam 65.24–66.8, in Douglas M.

Parrott, Nag Hammadi Codices V, 2–5 and VI with Papyrus Berolinensis 8502, 1 and 4 (Leiden: Brill, 1979), 156–59; James M. Robinson, The Nag Hammadi Library in English (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1977), 257 (1988 ed., 279); cf. OTP 1:712 (chapter and verses given as 2:1–2); Bentley Layton, The Gnostic Scriptures: A New Translation with Annotations and Introductions (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1987), 56.

360. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 1:25–26; 2:55–56 (scene 10).

361. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 1:28–29; 2:56 (scene 10).

362. Étienne Drioton, “L’écriture énigmatique du Livre du Jour et de la Nuit,” in Alexandre Piankoff, Le Livre du Jour et de la Nuit (Cairo: IFAO, 1942), 87–88.

363. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:69.

364. Frankfort, Ancient Egyptian Religion, 54.

365. Anthes, “Maat des Echnaton von Amarna,” 2.

366. Anthes, “Maat des Echnaton von Amarna,” 28.

367. Siegfried Morenz, Ägyptische Religion (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1960), 137.

368. Alfred Wiedemann, “Maā[t], déesse de la vérité, et son rôle dans le panthéon égyptien,” Annales du Musée Guimet 10 (1887): 573, cf. 561–73.

369. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 432–33.

370. Bernhard Grdseloff, “L’insigne du grand juge égyptien,”

ASAE 40 (1940): 190.

371. Hellmut Brunner, “Zum Verständnis des Spruches 312

der Sargtexte,” ZDMG 111 (1961): 445, discussing CT

312.

372. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 432–33.

373. Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 133–34; Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 141–42, 144.

374. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 430.

375. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 121.

376. Grdseloff, “L’insigne du grand juge égyptien,” 194, emphasis deleted.

377. Jacques Vandier, “Iousâas et (Hathor)-Nébet-Hétépet,”

RdE 16 (1964): 143.

378. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 141.

379. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 433.

380. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 7.

381. Hornung, “Politische Planung und Realität im alten Ägypten,” 53.

382. Hans-Friedrich Weiss, Untersuchungen zur Kosmologie des hellenistischen und palästinischen Judentums (Berlin: Deutsche Akademie der

Wissenschaften, 1966), 206–10.

383. Grdseloff, “L’insigne du grand juge égyptien,” 194.

384. Gertrud Thausing, “Der ägyptische Schicksalsbegriff,”

MDAIK 8 (1939): 64.

385. Anthes, “Maat des Echnaton von Amarna,” 31–32.

386. Mayassis, Mystères égyptiens, 222–23.

387. Roger A. Bullard, The Hypostasis of the Archons (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1970), 24, lines 13–16; cf. Bullard’s translation on 25.

388. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire, 422–23.

389. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 53.

390. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 198, in Constantin E.

Sander-Hansen, Die religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre (Copenhagen: Levin and

Munksgaard, 1937), 78.

391. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 430.

392. Otto, Gott und Mensch, 62; and Eberhard Otto, “Das

‘goldene Zeitalter’ in einem ägyptischen Text,” in REHR, 103.

393. László Kákosy, “Ideas about the Fallen State of the World in Egyptian Religion: Decline of the Golden Age,”

Acta Orientalia 17 (1964): 206.

394. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 285–86.

395. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 42 n. 11; BD 136.

396. Thausing, “Der ägyptische Schicksalsbegriff,” 69.

397. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 125 n. 5.

398. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 281.

399. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 284.

400. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 282.

401. On the Origin of the World, 98–106.

402. Bullard, Hypostasis of the Archons, 25 lines 14–16.

403. Kurt Sethe, “Der Lautwert von

,” ZÄS 39 (1901):

135–37.

404. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 293.

405. George Daressy, “Notes et remarques,” RT 20 (1898): 84; Constantin E. Sander-Hansen, Das Gottesweib des Amun (Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1940), 13–15.

406. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 515.

407. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 515.

408. Shabako stone, line 49a–51a, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 46–47.

409. CT 132, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:153–54, 156–57.

410. Wilhelm Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” ZÄS 76 (1940): 21.

411. John A. Bailey, “Initiation and the Primal Woman in Gilgamesh and Genesis 2–3,” JBL 89 (1970): 149.

412. Theban Tomb 161, south wall, in Schott, Das schöne Fest vom Wüstentale, 897 (133).

413. Ringgren, “Light and Darkness in Ancient Egyptian Religion,” 141.

414. Geo Widengren, The Gnostic Attitude (Santa Barbara, Calif.: Institute of Religious Studies, 1973), 36–38.

415. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 23.

416. PT 217 §§152, 154, 156, 158, in Raymond O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969), 45.

417. Faulkner, Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 45 n. 2.

418. Ursula Schweitzer, Löwe und Sphinx im alten Ägypten (Glückstadt: Augustin, 1948), 30–31; cf. PT

217 §§152–59; 224 §218.

419. Faulkner, Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 179 n. l.

420. PT 503 §§1078–81, in Faulkner, Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 179.

421. Wolfhart Westendorf, “Maat, die Führerin des Sonnenlichtes, in der Architektur,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 143–

46.

422. Hornung, “Politische Planung und Realität im alten Ägypten,” 52.

423. Georg Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer, 2nd ed. (1912; reprint, Munich: Beck, 1971), 525.

424. Faulkner, Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 152 n. 4.

425. In Sethe, Übersetzung und Kommentar zu den altägyptischen Pyramidentexten, 4:117, cited in Faulkner, Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 152 n. 5.

426. PT 456 §§852–56, in Faulkner, Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 151–52.

427. Faulkner, Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 152 n. 1.

428. PT 271 §§388–91; Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 387.

429. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 305.

430. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 20–21.

431. Karl Schuchhardt, Alteuropa: Kulturen, Rassen, Völker, 3rd ed. (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1935), 122.

432. Moret, Histoire de l’orient, 245 n. 168.

433. Lina Eckenstein, “The God Sopt,” Ancient Egypt, part 3 (1917): 105, 107–8.

434. William B. Dinsmoor, “Archaeology and Astronomy,”

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 80 (1939): 106–14.

435. See Peter Tompkins, Secrets of the Great Pyramid (New York: Harper and Row, 1971), esp. chaps. 9, 11–

13.

436. Colin Renfrew, “Carbon 14 and the Prehistory of Europe,” Scientific American, October 1971, 63–72.

437. For more on the Stone of Truth, see above, commentary to line 16, pp. 190–202.

438. Joachim Jeremias, “Der Eckstein,” Angelos 1 (1925): 65–70.

439. E. A. E. Reymond, “Worship of the Ancestor Gods at Edfu,” CdE 38 (1963): 52; cf. E. A. E. Jelinková, “The Shebtiw in the Temple at Edfu,” ZÄS 87 (1962): 49–54.

440. Thaʿlabī, Qiṣaṣ al-Anbiyāʾ (Cairo: Mustāfā al Bābi al-Halabi wa-Awlāduhu, a.h. 1345), 28–29.

441. Eusebius, Praeparatio evangelica (Preparation for the Gospel) 9.4, in PG 21:689.

442. Constant de Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,” CdE 36 (1961): 300–301.

443. De Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,”

95–96.

444. CT 61, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:263.

445. Strabo, Geography 17.816; Clement of Alexandria, Stromata 1.15–16, in PG 8:768, 777; Damasius, Life of Isidore, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 686–87.

446. Philo, De circumcisione 1, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 169.

447. For example, Herodotus, Histories 2.4; Lucian, De Syria dea 2.

448. CT 125, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:147; cf.

CT 124, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:147.

449. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:39.

450. P. Salt 825 6/6–7/1, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:49; 2:7*–8*.

451. Schott, Mythe und Mythenbildung im alten Ägypten, 10–13.

452. CT 61, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:263: “The pillars of heaven are uncovered that you may see the secrets that are in them.”

453. Gerald S. Hawkins, Stonehenge Decoded (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), 132‒48.

454. László Kákosy, “Probleme der ägyptischen Jenseitsvorstellungen in der Ptolemäer- und Kaiserzeit,”

in REHR, 63.

455. George Daressy, “Les formes du soleil aux différentes heures de la journée,” ASAE 17 (1917): 197–208; Schäfer, “Altägyptische Bilder der auf- und

untergehenden Sonne,” 15–38, with illustrations.

456. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 124.

457. Ludwig Borchardt, “Altägyptische Sonnenuhren,” ZÄS

48 (1910): 9–17; R. W. Sloley, “Primitive Methods of Measuring Time, with Special Reference to Egypt,” JEA

17 (1931): 166–78.

458. Ludwig Borchardt, “Eine Reisesonnenuhr aus Ägypten,” ZÄS 49 (1911): 66–68.

459. Theodor Dombart, “Der Zweitürmige Tempel-Pylon altägyptischer Baukunst und seine religiöse Symbolik,”

Egyptian Religion 1 (1933): 87–98.

460. Pierre Gilbert, “Autour du pylône de Khonsou,” CdE 23

(1948): 21 and fig. 4.

461. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 26–27.

462. Gilbert, “Autour du pylône de Khonsou,” 17.

463. Gilbert, “Autour du pylône de Khonsou,” 20–21.

464. CT 159, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:364.

465. 2 Enoch 6, in A. Vaillant, Le Livre des Secrets D’Hénoch (Paris: Institut d’Études Slaves, 1952), 15.

466. 2 Enoch 13, in Vaillant, Le Livre des Secrets D’Hénoch, 41.

467. CT 157, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:336–40.

468. CT 155, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:296–97.

469. François Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” ASAE 51 (1951): 399.

470. Uvo Hölscher, “Erscheinungsfenster und Erscheinungsbalkon im königlichen Palast,” ZÄS 67

(1931): 43–51.

471. Enuma Elish V, 8.

472. Brugsch, Religion und Mythologie der alten Ägypter, 236–37, in Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 100.

473. For more on transformations, see below, commentary to line 37, pp. 299–301.

474. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

101.

475. P. Salt 825 14/5–6, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:15*.

476. 2 Enoch 13, in Vaillant, Le Livre des Secrets D’Hénoch, 109.

477. 2 Enoch 13, in Vaillant, Le Livre des Secrets D’Hénoch, 49.

478. 2 Enoch 6, in Vaillant, Le Livre des Secrets D’Hénoch, 91.

479. 2 Enoch 13, in Vaillant, Le Livre des Secrets D’Hénoch, 41.

480. CT 60, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:252–53.

481. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 128.

482. CT 79, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:26.

483. CT 159, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:367–68.

484. Diodorus, Library 1.81.

485. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 183.

486. Brigham Young, General Conference Sermon in G.S.L.

City, Millennial Star 15 (1853): 488, emphasis in original.

487. “Local and Other Matters: The Manti Temple,”

Deseret News, 1 May 1877, 2.

488. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 31–32.

489. Westendorf, “Maat, die Führerin des Sonnenlichtes,”

144.

490. Westendorf, “Maat, die Führerin des Sonnenlichtes,”

144–45.

491. Westendorf, “Maat, die Führerin des Sonnenlichtes,”

145–46.

492. Westendorf, “Maat, die Führerin des Sonnenlichtes,”

143.

493. Tompkins, Secrets of the Great Pyramid.

494. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:19.

495. Hawkins, Stonehenge Decoded, 138.

496. Cited in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:4.

497. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:7.

498. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:14.

499. Frankfort, Ancient Egyptian Religion, 155.

500. W. M. Flinders Petrie, Six Temples at Thebes, 1896

(London: Quaritch, 1897), 26.

501. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 26–27.

502. P. Bremner-Rhind 23/11, 13–15, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 46–47.

503. Wilhelm Spiegelberg, “Die vermeintliche Erwähnung des Blitzableiters in ägyptischen Inschriften,” ZÄS 45

(1908): 34–35; Peter Le Page Renouf, “‘Nuk pu nuk’: Use of Obelisks as Lightning Conductors,” in The Life-Work of Sir Peter Le Page Renouf, ed. Edouard Naville and W. Harry Rylands (Paris: Leroux, 1903), 2:162.

504. Raymond O. Faulkner, “The Pregnancy of Isis,” JEA

54 (1968): 40–41.

505. Dieter Müller, “Die Zeugung durch das Herz in Religion und Medizin der Ägypter,” Or 35 (1966): 273–74.

506. Alan H. Gardiner, “The House of Life,” JEA 24 (1938): 166–69, 173, 178.

507. Walter Wreszinski, Atlas zur altägyptischen Kulturgeschichte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1923–36), 1.2:114.

508. Winfried Barta, “Bemerkungen zur Darstellung der Jahreszeiten im Grabe des Mrr-wj-kȝ.j, ” ZÄS 97 (1971): 6–7.

509. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:5–10.

510. PT 600 §1652, discussed by Ringgren, “Light and Darkness in Ancient Egyptian Religion,” 142.

511. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire, 610.

512. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 25.

513. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 124.

514. De Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,”

310.

515. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 71.

516. Kees, “Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” 43.

517. John A. Wilson, The Culture of Ancient Egypt (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1956), 73.

518. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 399.

519. Ptolemaic version of PT 600 §§1652–53, in László

Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 99.

520. P. Louvre N. 3292 M/8–13, in Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 68–69.

521. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 129–30.

522. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 95.

523. Gustave Lefebvre, “L’oeuf divin d’Hermopolis,” ASAE

23 (1923): 66.

524. De Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,”

64–65.

525. Mehauden, “Secret central de l’initiation,” 68.

526. PT 600 §1652.

527. Cited in Louis Speleers, “La signification des pyramides,” in Mélanges Maspero, ed. Pierre Jouguet (Cairo: IFAO, 1935–38), 607–8.

528. Cited in Speleers, “Signification des pyramides,” 603.

529. Cited in Speleers, “Signification des pyramides,” 604.

530. Moret, Histoire de l’orient, 239–40; PT 505 §1090; 600 §1659; James H. Breasted, Development of

Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt (New York: Scribner’s Sons, 1912), 110; Alexandre Moret,

“L’influence du décor solaire sur la pyramide,” in Mélanges Maspero, ed. Pierre Jouguet (Cairo: IFAO, 1935–38), 628–33, 636; Speleers, “Signification des pyramides,” 608–10, scorns the whole business.

531. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 45.

532. CT 79, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:26.

533. Leonard H. Lesko, The Ancient Egyptian Book of

Two Ways (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), 98.

534. P. Salt 825 6/8–9, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:8*.

535. P. Salt 825 7/1–2, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:8*.

536. Alexandre Piankoff, “Le Livre des Quererts,” BIFAO

41 (1942): 7 and pl. 1; 42 (1944): 5 and pl. 11.

537. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire, 523–54, 594–95, 604.

538. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire, 524, 532, gives a bibliography; see esp.

Synesius, De providential (On Providence) 2.4, in PG

66:1272.

539. Paul Karge, Rephaim: Die vorgeschichtliche Kultur Palästinas und Phöniziens (Paderborn: Schöningh, 1917), 524, 526, 529.

540. John Baines, “Bnbn: Mythological and Linguistic Notes,” Or 39 (1970): 390–95.

541. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, esp. 172–237.

542. Baines, “Bnbn: Mythological and Linguistic Notes,”

395–96.

543. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 137.

544. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 129.

545. Kákosy, “Zu einer Etymologie von Philä,” 41.

546. Hermann Junker, Das Götterdekret über das Abaton (Vienna: Hölder, 1913), 35–36.

547. PT 581 §1556–57.

548. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 152–53.

549. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 410.

550. Piankoff, Pyramid of Unas, 10.

551. Charles Autran, “Sothis-Sirius et le monde préhellénique,” MIFAO 66 (1935–38): 542–44.

552. Maxence de Rochemonteix, “Le temple d’Apet, où est engendré l’Osiris de Thèbes,” RT 3 (1881): 83; enlarged and reprinted as “Le temple d’Apet où est engendré l’Osiris thébain,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 3 (Paris: Leroux, 1894), 192; Wilhelm

Czermak, “Vom grossen Gedanken Ägyptens,” Archiv für ägyptische Archäologie 1 (1938): 208–9.

553. BD 134, in Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, 1: pl.

CXLVII.

554. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 124.

555. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 72–

73.

556. P. Salt 825 8/5–6, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:11*.

557. Fritz Hommel, Ethnologie und Geographie des alten Orients (Munich: Beck, 1926), 123–24.

558. Symeon, Archbishop of Thessalonica, De sacra liturgia 98, in PG 155:292–93.

559. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 94; so read the inscriptions at Edfu, in de Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,” 64.

560. Hippolytus, Refutatio omnium haeresium (Refutation of All Heresies) 26–29, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 435.

561. Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” 393–95.

562. Alexandre Moret, Du caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 138–39.

563. Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” 398.

564. Frankfort, Ancient Egyptian Religion, 153.

565. Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” 400.

566. August F. von Pauly and Georg Wissowa, Paulys Realencyclopädie der classischen

Altertumswissenschaft, 1st ser. (Stuttgart: Metzler/Druckenmüller, 1893–1978), 16.2:1243.

567. Heinrich Schäfer, “Die Ausdeutung der Spiegelplatte als Sonnenscheibe,” ZÄS 68 (1932): 1–7.

568. Hugh W. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, August 1969, 75–87.

569. Rochemonteix, “Le temple d’Apet,” 75–79, in Oeuvres diverses, BE 3, 175–78.

570. Brunner, “Zum Verständnis des Spruches 312 der Sargtexte,” 443; Étienne Drioton, review of The Egyptian Coffin Texts, vol. 4, by Adriaan de Buck, BiOr 10 (1953): 169–70, quotation on 169.

571. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 45.

572. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 38.

573. Wb 1:55.

574. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 40.

575. Odes of Solomon 15:1–2.

576. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1/17, citing Rufinus,

Historia ecclesiastica (History of the Church) 11.23, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 627.

577. George Daressy, “Notes sur les XXIIe, XXIIIe, et XXIVe dynasties,” RT 35 (1913): 131.

578. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 33–

34.

579. Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” 18; BD 1.

580. P. Bremner-Rhind 16/10–16, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 30.

581. Charles Boreux, “À propos de quelques bustes égyptiens,” in Studies Presented to F. Ll. Griffith, ed.

S. R. K. Glanville (London: Egyptian Exploration Society, 1932), 400.

582. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:53–55.

583. CT 60, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:255.

584. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 96.

585. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:151.

586. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

44.

587. Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” 396.

588. P. Louvre N. 3292 M/8–13, in Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 68–69; cf. 44.

589. P. Louvre N. 3292 T/13–16, in Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 91.

590. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” BIFAO 42 (1944): 5

and pl. 11.

591. Hugh W. Nibley, “Baptism for the Dead in Ancient Times (Part II),” IE, January 1949, 24–26, 60, reprinted in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:113–

21.

592. P. Louvre N. 3292 M/8–13, in Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 68–69, 44.

593. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” BIFAO 42 (1944): 8

and pls. XVI–XVII, pp. 18–19, 22, 25, etc.

594. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:63.

595. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:67.

596. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:71.

597. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:51.

598. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 126.

599. Serge Sauneron, “L’hymne au soleil levant des Papyrus de Berlin 3050, 3056 et 3048,” BIFAO 53 (1953): 69, 88.

600. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” BIFAO 41 (1942): 7

and pls. 1–3.

601. P. Bremner-Rhind, colophon 8, 10, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 33.

602. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, September 1969, 90–93.

603. P. Salt 825 9/4–8, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:12*.

604. Müller, “Zeugung durch das Herz,” 273–74.

605. P. Bremner-Rhind 12/1, 10, 12, 16, 18 in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 22–23.

606. Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 28.

607. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 195; English trans., 200.

608. P. Salt 825 14/1–2, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:14*; see also 1:142, 178 n. 147.

609. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:475; 3: pl. 18.

610. Secrets of Enoch, Annex, Ms. R, 6.

611. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:280.

612. Julian Morgenstern, “Moses with the Shining Face,”

Hebrew Union College Annual 2 (1925): 1–27; H.-Ch.

Puech and G. Quispel, “Les écrits gnostiques du codex Jung,” Vigiliae christianae 8 (1954): 44–45.

613. Nibley, “Qumran and ‘The Companions of the Cave,’”

177–98, reprinted in Old Testament and Related Studies, CWHN 1:253–84.

614. Paul Barguet, Le Livre des Morts des anciens égyptiens (Paris: Cerf, 1967), 16–17.

615. Treatise on the Resurrection I, 45, 25–34.

616. Micha J. bin Gorion, Die Sagen der Juden (Frankfurt: Rütten and Loening, 1913–27), 1:106.

Commentary, Part 4

The Garden Story

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 27,

37–38

27 (2/5). invocation offerings of bread, beer,

flesh, and fowl, of libation water and

incense as the requirements of each day.

37 (2/15).…Thy ba is deified in the duat, being about to ( r, so as to) make whatever transformation ( ḫprw) it desires.

38. Thou makest the rustlings (whisperings, breezes, scatterings, splittings) of the

[ JSP adds: most] noble ished-tree in Heliopolis

Figure 92. The lady Nut gives the candidate food and water of life from the tree, an event depicted with great frequency and variety in the Egyptian funerary manuscripts. Redrawn from Stela 159, ca. 1250 B.C.

Courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

Commentary: The Garden of

Abundance

It would seem that the standard procedure

in the mysteries is to enter a new life or a

new world through a garden, where one rests

for a while and takes nourishment1 after the

exertions and perils of the passage (fig. 92).

The initiate is received at the gates of the

underworld, “beside a lake surrounded by

trees. ”2 Washed and cleansed, “he [or she]

comes forth … crossing these two heavens.

… I eat where you eat; I drink where you

drink.” 3 “My garden is in the Field of Rest; my increase ( or nakedness; ḥȝw.t) is in the Field of Rushes.” 4 The recipient, wearing a garment of leaves, sits in the shade as his

heart expands from the consumption of food

offerings. 5 He puts forth his hands and eats and gorges on the wind of life! 6 In the Papyrus of Ani, that hero asks Nut to give

him the fruit of the sycamore that he may live

forever; having partaken of the fruit, Ani and

his wife in the next scene are seen drinking

the water of life that flows beneath the tree

while they hold symbols of breath or wind in

their hands. 7 The text explains the scene:

“Hail, thou Sycamore tree of the goddess

Nut!” says the candidate. “Give me of the

[water and of the] air which is in thee. ”8

Along with the heat that the sun provides, air

and water are the prime requisites of life. As

the ultimate boon to the initiate in the

underworld comes the command of Osiris

Khentamentit: “Let him be given by the hand

of Nut the water which flows from the

sycamore!” 9 Bernard Chapira has called attention to an old Jewish tradition that “the

tree of life is planted near a source of the

water of life. ”10 In the cenotaph of Seti I, Henri Frankfort suggests, “the trees, which

symbolised natural life eternally renewed,”

were watered by a canal, “which, both as

Primeval Water and as inundation waters,

… represented the waters from which all

natural life had sprung.” 11

Whatever the other appointments and

aspects of the great prehistoric cult center, it

was “most especially the ‘temple of Re in

the great garden.’” 12 In the Amduat the visiting sun-god inaugurates gardening

projects whenever he arrives at a new

station on his progress, assigning plots of

ground to the local inhabitants to cultivate

for their sustenance. 13 In the ninth hour of the Amduat we see nine gods with wavy, life-conveying ḏʿm-staves and life ( ʿnḫ) symbols in their hands, causing all the trees and

plants to grow in their place; the nine all

have garden names—Bud, Stem, Field, etc.

—while “Horus who is over the garden

(pond) of the gods” stands guard. 14 The agricultural names are mixed with seasonal

names: “He Who Divides the Seasons,” “He

Who Belongs to the Seasons,” “He of the

Year,” “He of the Sheaf,” “He of the Light,”

“Great Light-bringer,” “Radiating One,” “He

Whose Arm Shineth,” “Nepre the corn-

god.” 15 These gods tell the sun-god: “May your seasons endure, your years be regular

( ḏd) , may the proper forms ( ḫprw) suit your hours. … May spelt for bread and barley be

your due! … You circumambulate (?) the

images in order to revive the fields. You are

the farmers ( sḫty.w) of Wernes, whose ba s live through me!” 16

The role of agriculture in the mysteries is

still baffling.17 But as far as the world of the Coffin Texts is concerned, Eberhard Otto

draws the conclusion that it goes back to a

premythical concept of vegetative

immortality, in which the fertility of the earth

was designated by the word Osiris, the earth itself by Geb, and the grain by Nepre; those words later came to designate gods for

whom appropriate myths were invented. 18

Certainly the Coffin Texts make much of a

ritual Garden of Eden in the prehistoric

complex of Heliopolis: “The staff of bread

is in Heliopolis, the seven things in the Field

of Reeds ( sḫt-ỉ ȝrw, the garden),” 19

“supplying food offerings in Heliopolis … in the Field of Rest.” 20 Indeed it is the garden that supplies the necessary abundance: “I

live on bread in the Field of Rest. My

abundance is in the Field of Reeds; my

basket is in my hand of these plants. ”21 “The horizon people say to me: Eat beneath the

tree of ʿntyw (balsam).” 22

The rescue and feeding of the swimmer

(Osiris) serve as a reminder that eating

generally follows a crossing of the waters:

“Osiris made him sleep with the pẖrw

(restorative food) in the hnhnw (bark, pun on hnw ‘family’); NN rides the hnhnw-ship of Ḫpr (continuing states of being), eating as one who lives on what he eats, even on

wind.” 23 It is the flood itself, the inundation, that provides the food. 24 The food offering makes a man flourish ( wȝḏ; lit. “be green”) in the beyond: “I am the great food offering

of the invocation offering which came forth

as a great food offering in Heliopolis. … O

ye within the Field of Reeds, I have brought

this thing as a ship’s cargo, … that it might

flourish there. ”25 It is the bringing of the year-offerings to Heliopolis for the familiar

scene of the year-king presiding over the

feast of abundance beneath his green bower.

The Inundation is Hapy, the father of the gods

who creates himself, 26 and “the water of the sacred lake is identical with the primaeval

water, Nu(n), and the water of the

inundation.” 27 Hence the feast of abundance, as a gift of the Inundation, is the supreme

expression of the divine power to create. In

lines 46–47 below, it is specifically Hapy,

the Nile in flood, who heaps the tables with

all good things (fig. 93). 28

Figure 93. Early depiction of the Nile god Hapy,

which shows his body covered with waves, the

symbol for water. Redrawn from the mortuary temple of Sahure, ca. 2460 B.C. Courtesy of Cairo Museum.

Throughout the world the archetype of the

ritual meal, shared by the living and the dead

together, is an earnest of abundance to

follow, especially of water. 29 The New Year’s offering assures food throughout the

year: “Behold, as for a temple-day, it is

1/360 of a year. When ye therefore divide

everything that comes into this temple, consisting of bread, of beer, and of meat for

each day, that which makes 1/360 of the

bread, of the beer, and of everything, which

comes into this temple, is the unit in these

temple-days.” 30

The wisest Egyptian priests, according to

Plutarch, 31 identify Osiris with the Nile as the principle of life-giving moisture—and

hence with the seed and the grain as a

benevolent parent, 32 creator, and king. 33 In the Breathing text Papyrus Louvre N. 3279,

the subject makes three requests of Hapy, the

Inundation, namely (l) “refreshment of the

heart, [or] regeneration,” (2) “power like

that of [the lady] Sekhmet,” and (3) “a happy

old age … after the resurrection” —“a

curious wish,” as Jean-Claude Goyon

observes. 34 Specifically, the subject receives the bread of Geb, lustrations of the Nile,

wine and sdh-beer, and especially the

incense of the breath of life, all of which is a way of denoting that the miracle of

resurrection occurs every year at the moment

of the inundation. 35 What Hapy brings is “the water of rejuvenation,” “the new water,” and

in the Pyramid Texts Hapy and Osiris are

mistakenly associated with each other by

both being identified with that water. 36 In the end it is moisture, heat, and oxygen that

revive the dead: the Papyrus Louvre N. 3279

Book of Breathings ends with the words,

“the rays of Re, the breezes of Amon, the water of Hapy—all belong to me forever! ”37

Provided with heat, oxygen, and water—the

basic prerequisites of life, the new arrival is

in business on this earth.

Lists of Food Offerings

Line 27: “offerings of bread, beer, flesh (cattle), and fowl, of libation water and

incense as the requirements of each day”

Though lists of offerings from the temple and funeral texts contain the same dozen or

so items, they appear in a variety of different

combinations. The lists differ even among

the various Breathing texts supplied by

Philippe-Jacques de Horrack. The Joseph

Smith manuscript includes the sign for

woven stuff or alabaster. 38 A more complete list is, for example, one from the stela of the

daughter of Psameticus II: “cattle, fowls,

libations, wine, milk, ointment, alabaster,

clothing, body lotion of Re, every good,

delectable ( nḏm) and pure thing.” 39 Pyramid Text 208 includes roast, cakes, and drink—a

regular meal.40 In every temple, according to Philippe Derchain, there was a “château des

vivres ( ḥw.t ḏfȝw),” which had a cosmic

significance, 41 the things offered by the king being returned to the land with increase,

thanks to the pharaoh’s capacity to mediate

between mankind and the powers of the

universe.42 Here the ritual meal revives the dead. Osiris, as a god of vegetation as well

as god of the dead, combines the sacrificial

offering with a nourishing meal. “All plants

come from him and grow from his members.

… These plants which grew up with thee are

the grain. He made them for the benefit of

mankind.” 43 The fractions of the Egyptian corn measure represented the various parts

of the eye of Horus, which taken altogether

represent the restored or perfect ( wḏȝ.t) eye of Horus, the symbol of the complete

restoration of the hero to life and health.44

The eye was eaten as sacramental bread.

Thus in the very ancient Ramesseum drama:

“As grain is taken to the barn, bring now to

me the eye restored from Seth’s attack.

[Stage direction:] The two loaves symbolize

the two eyes of Horus. … [The followers of

Horus:] See, we restore unto thy face that

eye which late was wine-red with flowing

blood! [Horus:] Never again shall it be taken from me. … [Stage direction:] The eye of

Horus is elevated before the congregation.

… The bread is taken to symbolize the

defunct Osiris who has indeed been placed,

like the grain … in the earth.” 45 As the eye of Horus, the sacrificial food is of divine

substance; “one may even speak of a

transubstantiation” in which the sns-cake

itself is to be viewed as deified substance,

according to Siegfried Morenz. 46 The Egyptian sacrifice was not a naive attempt to

supply the recipient with rations to keep him

alive: it was not the substance of the food but

its power that was shared by both giver and

receiver in a “common meal of brotherhood”

—a true sacrament. 47

The Lady in the Garden

As soon as the “sem-sleeper” awakes, as

we have seen, the lady Isis is commanded to

“go to Horus, that he may seek his father!”

meaning, according to Otto, “that he may

perform the essential necessary ordinances

that follow. ”48 In a creation text entitled the

“Multitude of Creatures,” we hear Re

immediately after the creation saying to Shu,

“Shu, my son, take unto thee my daughter Nut

and take charge of the multitudes [of things]

that live in the night heaven; take

responsibility for them ( lit. place them upon thy head), and be their keeper ( lit.

feeder).” 49

Wilhelm Czermak has compared the

Opening of the Mouth episode to the

awakening of Adam in the Bible. The man

becomes “the man Adam” in the fullest sense

only when he opens his eyes in a new world

and, having forgotten what went before,

“sees” and “knows” as his intellect awakens.

But the most important thing he sees and

knows is his wife, after which God makes

him aware of the rest of the creation, which he proceeds to investigate and name.50

That male and female must share in the

ordinances if they are to be effective is

indicated by the remarkable circumstance, as

Goyon notes in connection with the Book of

Breathings, that even when the initiate is a

woman, she always expresses herself as if

she were a man as she identifies herself with

various divinities.51

Figure 94. The starry heavens as the embrace of the body of Nut, from which everything comes forth and to which everything returns—represented by the sun in his ship. The space beneath the heavens is spanned by Shu, who wears the feather and supports the

solar-ship. He is flanked by goddesses of the east and west. Restored drawing after P. Louvre N. 3293, ca.

890 B.C. Courtesy of Louvre Museum.

In the long Book of Breathings, there is

indication of a change of scene at this point,

with the specific statement that in passing

from one room to another, one undergoes a change of nature: “You step into the temple

of Horus and Seth. … You sanctify yourself

in his palace (passages). You undergo

change(s) at the gate of Ptah (the creator); as

a ram you enter the house of the rams; you

pass through the hall of the birth house of the

Mighty. Your heart is happy in the temple of

the Lady.” 52 One adapts oneself to a new station, which can be done by a simple

change of costume.53 In Book of the Dead 21, clearly an initiation text, a figure in shining

white robes emerges out of the dark with a

basket on his head to lead the initiate to the

“good ( nfr.t) ways of heaven.” 54 Whether the initiate meets the Lady just before or just

after entering a room representing the garden

makes little difference since in either case

the meeting comes at the initiation of a new

phase of the journey or drama. In Egypt in

the Pyramid Age, we find King Unas, in the

process of the ordinances, emerging from the waters to enter “the resting place of green

meads ( Gefilden) on the horizon,” which

Joachim Spiegel equates with “the gardens

that surround the tomb complex,” the dead

assuming the role of garden-god as the coffin

moves into “the so-called ‘waiting room.’” 55

His object here is to meet with “the high lady

of Heliopolis,” Nut, the Lady of Heaven,

here symbolized by the grave itself,

receiving the dead into its embrace (fig.

94).56 First, the king is embraced by the lady Nephthys, whose outspread, waiting arms

are represented in a carving on the lid of the

coffin. 57 Passing over the Field of Reeds to his highest station, the same king is met by

“his sister Sothis, his mother the Dawn.”

Their meeting represents a marital union at

the heliacal rising of the star Sirius.58

Finally, he “flies to heaven among the gods,”

only to be met by Nut again, whom he hails

with a joyful cry of recognition: “Hail to thee, O garden of my repose!” 59 The journey ends as it began, with a lady in a garden. The

Book of Night opens with “the Great Lady,”

“Mistress of All the Earth,” “the Lady of

Life,” receiving the initiate at the gate of the

new world. 60 In the sixteenth hour of the Amduat comes the joyful announcement,

“Thy mother Nut joins herself to thee, she

dispels thy sorrow, … she embraces thee. …

Awake, awake, in peace! … The Beloved

One, the Lady of the Fruit, she who brings to

thee what thou desirest.” 61 Before the hero puts in his appearance at the great festival of

the valley, the Lady gets everything in

readiness to receive him; mixing the drinks,

“the Mother comes, fair of face,” to meet

him, while her guest comes rejoicing and

calling out, “Hail Mother, Lady of Heaven,

Great Queen of All the Earth!” And so they

meet, “Amon and Mut, Father and Mother.” 62

The thing to remember is that in these rites

“all goddesses pass as mythical ‘mothers’”

and that “all their names have the same

connotation of mother-goddess.” 63

In the present case, the lady is Nut, “the

Great Fruitful One ( nḫb.t wr.t),” 64 “the Mother of all things. ”65 She is Mut, the mother par excellence, who represents every

other goddess.66 Indeed, in the drama every goddess named must be considered “as the

mythical ‘mother’” of the candidate and of

all else as well since she represents the

mother-goddess. 67 At the beginning of a great life cycle, “Nut says to Atum: Kiss ( snsn) thy daughter Maat; thou hast placed her upon

thy nose. … This is thy daughter Maat with

thy son Shu; may his name live.” To this, Shu

says: “I came forth from his nose; … he

breathed ( sn) me out along with my sister

Maat.” 68 Here the first pair are Shu and Maat. In the reliefs of the temple of Ramses

II, Isis is Mut, the mother, while the father is Min. Winfried Barta equates the pair—Isis

and Min—to Amun and Mut, “as the parents

of the king.” Each couple of the Ennead is in

turn the primal pair. 69 The equating of Isis with Maat “ultimately reflects the coronation

rites enacted in the temple of Ptah at

Memphis,” that is, the most ancient creation

rites. 70 The tendency of Maat to emerge in first place as the female lead is due to the

peculiar ease, already noted, 71 with which she can substitute for any other deity and to

the fact that she has a place not only in the

coronation rites but in all ordinances,72

where her presence is necessary to vouch for

the correctness, legitimacy, and authority of

all that is done; she is not only wise and far-

seeing, but she is the unfailing sense of

rightness and justice. 73 Hence when the pharaoh ritually dramatizes the creation, or

rather performs “the repeating of the

creation,” doing what his father Re did in the beginning, “everything he does is creation,

therefore his planning must be Maat:

everything must be according to Maat. ”74

She is still the Stone of Truth, the green

symbol of Maat that hangs at the throat of the

king.

The Lady and the Tree

The Lady is often identified with a tree,

and in the vignettes to the Book of the Dead,

she appears in different degrees of

incorporation with the tree, the concept

varying to suit the fancy of the individual

tomb owner. 75 As Ludwig Keimer explains it, “the dead in his voyage in the other world

was received by a good goddess who gave

him food and drink. She usually bears the

names of Nut, Hathor, and Isis but is often

simply called ‘Lady of the Sycamore,’” the

sycamore being a type of fig tree (see color

plate 11). Though she is first depicted as being actually incorporated in the tree in the Eighteenth Dynasty,76 her identification with it goes back to prehistoric times. The life-giving sycamore recalled the biblical tree of

life to Eugène Lefébure, who identified it

with the mfkȝ.t (turquoise)-tree, the tree of the Lady of the Land of Mafek that grew in

the Field of Reeds. 77 The tree that receives the travel-weary Osiris into its arms78

performs the function of the Lady, who is so

often identified with that tree. W. M.

Flinders Petrie noted that in Palestine holy

trees are still called “Our Lady. ”79 It has often been suggested that the sycamore was

the original form of Hathor herself, whose

proper function as Lady of the Tree,

whatever name she may go by, is to receive

the newcomer to a strange land with

refreshment after an arduous and dangerous

journey. 80 Let us recall that Odysseus hailed

the princess who received and revived him after his most dangerous water journey as a

sacred palm tree81 and that when Abraham made the most dangerous journey of his life,

that into Egypt, he was rescued by Sarah,

who was in the form of a palm tree. 82 It should also be recalled that the ladies Edjo

( Wȝḏy.t, the Green One) and Nekhbet

received our Breathings candidate as he

emerged from the waters of purification.

This same Madame Edjo is “the Lady of

Ammu, the pleasant trees … Lady of the

turquoise … and of the Ammu-trees.” 83

When Horus was blinded or slain by Seth

under the šn-wšʿ-tree, it was Hathor, the

sycamore lady, who healed him. 84 The tree-goddess gives birth or rebirth, 85 the archaic Hathor of the southern sycamore being

herself the “birth house of the king.” 86 Let us recall that our Breathings texts were found in

“fourteen coffins, on each of which was

placed a bunch of sycamore branches.” 87 So it is with considerable interest that we next

consider line 38 of our text, followed by line

37.

The Noble Ished-Tree and Other

Sacred Trees

Line 38: “Thou makest the (these) rustlings (whisperings, breezes, scatterings, splittings)

of the (this) noble ished-tree in Heliopolis”

Here we meet with a variety of

interpretations. The most obvious is

suggested by the word šršr, which, with the wind- or breath-determinative with which it

is written here, suggests the whispering

sound of the breeze in the leaves (cf. Lat.

susurrare, Gk. psithyrisma). Divination by the sound of wind in the branches of sacred

trees is among the oldest and most

widespread of customs in the Near East, 88 so

it is not surprising that the translation of this particular passage suggested in the

Wörterbuch 89 is “sich am Rauschen des ỉšd-

Baumes erquicken? (to be revived or

refreshed by the rustling leaves of the sacred

ished-tree [?]).” Remembering that the wise lady Maat is in charge of the tree, we are

reminded that “it has been maintained by

some scholars” that the name of the Sibyl “is

not a proper name but implies a sound

issuing from a subterranean oracle, conveyed

either by the rustling of the wind, as in the

case of the oaks of Dodona, or by the splash

of water. ”90 Osiris, the arch-initiate, was restored to life “by the effusion of water,” to

be sure, but it was water that came from the

spring that flowed from the foot of the divine

fig tree at Heliopolis. 91 The close association of the water and the tree is

vividly shown in the vignettes to chapter 58

of the Book of the Dead.

Klaus Baer renders this passage, “You have scattered the Noble Ished-tree in

Heliopolis, ”92 and he quotes Budge, who notes that “when the deceased scatters (the

pieces?) of the Ished-tree, he is

accompanying Re at dawn.” 93 That is a typical naturalistic interpretation

characteristic of Budge’s day, but there is

quite compelling evidence to see here

reference to the ritual splitting of the tree.

Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von

Dechend have observed that in very early

year-rites from all over the world “we hear

of much sighing and crying over trees cut

down, sawed in two, and the like,” 94 and that peculiar emphasis is placed on “removed

posts or pegs, pulled out pins, wrecked

axles, and felled trees.” 95 Ritually, the splitting or felling of the tree both terminates

life and liberates it, ending the old cycle to

begin the new, as is seen in the famous

Egyptian Story of the Two Brothers: When Bata, the young brother, dies, he goes to the

valley of the cedars, 96 and his heart is shut up in a cedar tree until he can be born again.

First he is sacrificed as a bull, and two

persea ( ished) trees spring from his blood in the temple court. The jealous queen orders

the trees cut down with an ax, and during this

operation some of the flying chips enter her

mouth, whereby she conceives and brings

forth the same Bata!97 In the book of Daniel, the tree that was split was the king himself

(Daniel 4:13–15, 22); however, the stump

was not destroyed but preserved for a seven-

year period (Daniel 4:23), during which time

the king was ritually humiliated, eating grass

as an ox and growing feathers and claws like

a bird (Daniel 4:33; cf. Apis-bull and

Horus-hawk), only to resume his throne with

all his glory greatly enhanced at the end of

the seven-year period (Daniel 4:25, 31–34).

This is the Egyptian seven-year throne period of the king discussed by Gerald

Wainwright. 98 The splitting of the tree is plainly the substitute sacrifice, while its

preservation against the time when the king

shall be restored recalls the important role

of the ished-tree in the coronation, when the king’s first parents, Isis and Min, Amun and

Mut, stand “flanked by Seshat and Atum … ,

who write the name of the new king on the

leaves of the ished- tree” ;99 that is, the king is the tree (cf. Daniel 4:22). The custom is

mentioned in the Book of Breathings: “I am

the one before whom Atum has announced

the annals under the noble ished-tree of

Heliopolis. ”100 When the initiate “witnesses the splitting of the persea tree in the midst of

Rostau” in the Book of the Dead version,

that, according to Gertrud Thausing,

represents the creation—among other things,

the “splitting of ‘good’ and ‘evil,’” 101 or the

law of opposites set forth in the Shabako

creation text. Plutarch quotes Eudoxus as

reporting that the rites of splitting wood,

tearing linen, and spilling libations at

Busiris, the burial place of Osiris, were in

his day hopelessly mixed up. 102

Figure 95. The sacred tree grows over the grave and here harbors the benu- bird or phoenix, symbol of resurrection. Tomb of Horsiese (now destroyed), ca.

200 B.C. Redrawn from Wilkinson’s 1878 drawing in

Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians,

3:349, fig. 588.

At least from the beginning of the New

Kingdom, every major city in Egypt had a tomb of Osiris that was sheltered by a tree,

which was represented as the cedar of

Byblos sheltering the coffin of Osiris in that

city (fig. 95).103 From the long Book of Breathings, we learn that there was a cave

beneath the ished-tree. 104 According to the well-known legend, Osiris was actually shut

up in the cedar tree and had to be liberated

from it in order to be resurrected. 105

Joseph’s grave was an Urhügel at Shechem,

sheltered by a tree, in Egyptian fashion.106 In the Metternich Stela, Isis is called “the

beloved of Re (the Sun) … who came out of

the sycamore.” 107 At Denderah at the winter solstice Sokar-festival, the ba of Osiris was thought to be in the sycamore tree, the womb

of Nut, and a sycamore coffin was made for

the god on that day. 108 The theme is found in the long Book of Breathings: “Ye praise the

great tree trunk in the womb of his

mother.” 109 The king is enclosed in the tree trunk as in the womb (cf. Daniel 4:15, 23), to

be delivered with the splitting of the tree

itself. In some rites a willow tree was felled

and hollowed out, and seed corn was planted

inside it in the shape of Osiris, the god being

literally in the funeral willow.110 The Egyptians believed not only that the body of

the divine king was dissolved in the djed-

column, which was the trunk of the tree that

bore it to Phoenicia, but that that same djed-

column was the world pillar itself. 111

Stricker sees the djed-pillar as a corn sheaf (i.e., the corn maiden in the Book of

Breathings). 112 Actually, whether the tree is cut or split is a mere quibble since the two

acts seem to have the same significance, and

Plutarch says that the Egyptians themselves

were all mixed up regarding the splitting of

the wood. 113 As to the biblical equivalent of splitting wood, scholars have declared

Ecclesiastes 10:9–10 to be “the most difficult passage of the Book.” 114

Scholars have identified the ished-tree

with various trees, 115 including the cedar of Byblos116 and the olive tree. 117 In early times Ptah, Horus, Seth, and Thoth all enjoyed the

epithet, “he who possesses life beneath his

olive-tree. ”118 This certainly recalls Adam’s tree and “oil of mercy,” which restores life,

as well as “the leaves of the tree [that] were

for the healing of the nations” (Revelation

22:2).

Whatever the tree, if the god is to escape

from it, there must be a splitting of some

kind. The winter solstice rites of Heliopolis

“ended with the splitting of an ished-tree by a cat who represented Re himself,” thus

freeing the dead as the sun at the solstice:119

“I am the cat who cleft asunder the ished-

tree … in Heliopolis on the night of the

fight, ”120 the fight being the classic

showdown at the New Year between the powers of light and of darkness. Osiris, as

the first king of Egypt, bore the ritual title wp ỉšd, “he who opens the ished- tree,” 121 and at his sed- festival the pharaoh would preside at a shrine of Osiris called ḥrỉ ỉb pȝ ỉšd “that which is within the ished-tree,” the king

himself being opener of the ished. 122 On this occasion, the king wore a menat-collar of

greenery, suggesting his own function as a

tree. Compare this with the ivy which Osiris

wore that became a fixture in the Greek

mystery cults. 123 In Papyrus Skrine the initiate is crowned with cypress—another

non-Egyptian evergreen.124 In the rites of Papyrus Salt 825, the subject receives a

royal crown made of a branch that must be

cut from a tree that grows over the tomb of Osiris.125 The cutting or splitting of the tree is thus an essential element in the rites,

marking both the ending and beginning of a

life cycle: the motif occurs in some of the best-known heroic legends, in which the fall

of the hero is marked by the felling of a tree,

especially a cedar. 126 In the Genesis Apocryphon the dream of the felling of a

cedar signifies to Abraham his own death in

Egypt, from which fate he is rescued when the cedar is saved by the interposition of a

palm tree, representing either Sarah or the

hospitable pharaoh. 127 With characteristic insight, Petrie recognized an old Osiris motif

in the Christian logion, “Lift the stone and

there you will find me; split the wood and

there I am” 128—a survival, according to him, of “Osiris in the tree and pillar.” 129

There is a remarkable parallel between

the Coptic-Christian tradition that the ished-

tree (the persea of Hermopolis) bowed

down to Jesus and Mary in Egypt, 130 and certain Pyramid Texts that attest: “The palm

( ỉmȝ)-tree serves thee, the fig tree ( nbs)

bows down its head to thee” ;131 “the fig tree bows down to thee as thou passest through

the sky as Suntw ( Zwnṯw) . ” 132

The ished-tree has most often been

identified as the persea. In Karnak stood “the

holy persea tree of Amon,” and the stumps of

two persea trees were found in place by

modern excavators, flanking the gate of the

great temple of Hatshepsut at Deir el-

Bahri.133 Especially holy was the “noble persea tree ( ished) in Edfu,” under which the body of Osiris lay on the last day of his

funeral at “the cave of ished-tree in the holy place,” it being also “the venerated persea

tree in the place of Re on the eternal

horizon.” 134 Like the wȝḏ-green of the papyrus, the green fruit of the persea tree

was in Egypt the Eden symbol of abundance

of the vegetable world. 135

A list of sacred trees performing the same

function as the cedar of Osiris—the vine, the

sycamore, the thorn acacia—shows, according to Kurt Sethe, “that the same role

was attributed to the other trees as well.” 136

The ished-tree of Heliopolis itself was

rivaled by the nʿr.t-tree of Herakleopolis (Hermopolis?).137 The tree that grew over the grave of Osiris at Abydos was also

designated as the pqr-tree, the object of

pilgrimage. 138 In the rites detailed in Papyrus Salt 825, the procession was obliged to visit

“the ʿrw-trees of Edfu” before returning to the temple, 139 and Osiris was conducted to

“the mound of the nbḥ- trees” while a crown of branches was cut for him. 140 The ubiquitous holy tree “could not itself confer

fertility, but it typified that perfection

… which it was hoped to obtain by due

performance of the rites. ”141 Santillana and von Dechend suggest that the Babylonian

ḫuluppu-tree of life and death is none other

than the sacred persea or ished-tree,142

though the confusion with the cedar is even

more far-reaching. 143

The Ritual Garden

The sacred tree does not grow alone, but

in the midst of other trees. Every proper

temple had its sacred grove as well as its

sacred tree.144 Nay, every Egyptian who could afford it had a garden at his tomb,

along with a shady sycamore to afford

shelter and nourishment for the ba; 145 even the smallest family burial plot had such a

garden and pool,146 and for richer people the number and variety of trees reached

impressive proportions.147 Even in Old Kingdom archaeological excavations, stone

basins are found in tombs, representing,

according to Hermann Junker, pools, trees,

and cooling groves. 148 The sacred trees grow amidst other greenery in the pleasant

Meadows of Rest, where the candidate finds himself reposing after the preliminary phase

of his journey.149 Rostau, as Thausing explains it, is the world between, a

condition, a paradise, a garden, a meadow, a

land of life, a fire island (or realm of light),

the horizon (a mountain of light), the

beautiful west, the paths of the beyond,

etc. 150 One awakes in a heavenly place; the green Field of Reeds is near the green Field

of Malachite, and both are in heaven and yet

belong to the holy precinct of Heliopolis. 151

“Egyptians speak of a land beyond the grave,

the Fields of Iaru [Reeds]. … But never do

they speak of this as an earthly paradise; it is only to be reached by the dead.” 152

Neither is it entirely in heaven. The garden at

Heliopolis was a type found everywhere in

Egypt; far up the Nile, the garden of the

Adyton, as its name shows, was not

accessible to ordinary mortals. Like the

paradise of the Bible, it is neither heaven nor earth but lies between them. Lefébure

concludes that all these holy gardens,

whether Fields of Hotep, of Iaru, of Nsrsr,

etc., are localities that “représentent

simplement une même idée sous ses

différentes faces.” 153 One emerges after this life to find oneself in a green and delightful

garden of rest as an introduction to the next

world. 154 The Egyptians never tired of imitating such a happy transition in their own

festivals by crossing the waters to picnic at

the tombs of their relatives, 155 making pilgrimages to the garden tomb of Osiris at

Abydos, 156 coming “from all the land to the venerated persea trees at the place of Re on

the eternal horizon,” 157 or in fancy awakening like the famous shipwrecked

sailor from a sort of dream ( rsw.t) to find oneself in a fanciful Eden, which is neither

in the world nor out of it. 158 In a Hebrew

Enoch apocryphon, the Lord, in visiting the earth, rests in the Garden of Eden and,

moving in the reverse direction, passes

through “the garden to the firmament. ”159 So in Egypt: “You ferry over … to the green

fields, to the pure places of Re,” in which

“the green field of Re” is actually in

heaven. 160 In Egypt, the garden is a place of transition, “the footstool of Ra-Har-akht, the

beautiful horizon of the Spirit.” 161

In the Coffin Texts, we have the picture of

Atum, after completing the work of creation,

“reposing in his place,” a place of rich and

flowery fields where stand “the two

turquoise sycamores between which Re

emerged.” 162 So, in the temple of Ramses II at Thebes, the hero, after being washed,

censed, and clothed, enters the resting place

of Osiris in Thebes, lying down in a place

that provides fruits and flowers of the earth

through the god’s bounty. 163 In the Book of

Day, one emerges from the womb of Nut, passing through the waters of birth and life to

join “the lords who are in the Fields of

Turquoise beneath the ished- tree in the midst of Heliopolis.” 164 Paul Barguet points out that the garden of delights described in Book

of the Dead 110 goes back to the earliest

temple gardens, representing a special

privileged stopping place, “de repos par

excellence,” where the dead becomes

identified with the god Hotep, who

symbolizes at once food offerings ( ḥtp) and rest and peace ( ḥtp) . This garden, he further observes, lay, like Eden, to the east. 165 When the Book of Wandering through Eternity

addresses the traveler, saying, “You rest in

the branches of the noble sycamore and

receive shade from her leaves,” 166 we think at once of the šršr (rustling) of the noble ished; Thausing suggests that “perhaps this indicates as well resting [of the candidate] in

the temple grove” —a real temple grove. 167

In the Amduat the god rests after each leg of

his journey, and each time the narrator

formulaically announces, “The resting by the

majesty of this god. ”168 The place where he rests is a lush paradise of trees on the

eastern horizon. 169

Thus there is no objection to having more

than one such pleasant Eden; in fact, every

transition must be provided with such a

setting, not only from here to heaven, but in

the reverse direction in the beginning. All the

deities “associated with the Earth-God,” E.

A. E. Reymond notes, “had their resting-

place in the field of reeds,” which was one

type of the creator’s domain and the original

scene of the creation drama. 170 In actual practice it may not have been uncommon in

Egypt “to end one’s life as a hermit or in a

religious retreat—exactly as in ancient

(Vedic) India,” according to Walter Federn,

recalling the classic “garden” of Epicurus. 171

As we have seen, our Breathings drama

opens with the creation of man: “Now thou

beholdest Re when he comes down, Atum in

the evening” (line 20). This suggests to the

highly conditioned Christian mind the picture

of God condescending to come down to walk

with Adam “in the cool of the day” (Genesis

3:8). How the garden was established here

below in preparation for man’s arrival is

described in a remarkable writing from the

Coffin Texts: “My name lives, ‘Son of the

Living God.’ … I live in the members of my

father Atum. I am he whom … Atum created

with ( or as?) Nepre when he sent me down

to this earth … when my name became

Osiris, son of Geb (earth).” 172 The subject is sent down to earth as Nepre, the gardener,

and as the legitimate offspring of Atum, but

here he becomes a son of earth (Geb) and

takes a special name, that of Osiris—the

name which every initiate receives at the beginning of his endowments. The text

explains further: “I am the Living One for

whose sake the heavens were organized; my

father Atum embraced me, he was pleased

with me, and returned satisfied to his

horizon, where he would meet me again on

his way.” 173

That the proper inhabitant of the primal

garden is the first man is clear from an early

creation epic in which Re as creator orders

that “a Field of Repose be stretched out, and

so the Field of Rest came into being. … I

will place therein to inhabit it all manner of

living things which are suspended in the

heavens and the stars. … I will place

multitudes to worship me, and it was

done. ”174 In the Shabako stone, the earth is prepared for man’s habitation in advance,

first by the planting of rushes and papyrus at

the gates, 175 and then “out of Ptah who

created Atum came forth all manner of nourishment and food” for the creatures who

were about to come down and inhabit the

earth.176

The main themes emphasized in this

section of our text—the whispering leaves,

the lovely ished-tree of life, the first rays of the sun awakening the man, the primal shrine

and place of creation at Heliopolis—

definitely puts us in the Eden situation. It is

the same situation that meets us in the Book

of Day and Night with its hymn of joy at the

moment of sunrise: “Praised be the lords of

the Fields of Turquoise under the ished-tree in the midst of Heliopolis.” 177 Here the word ished has the determinative not of a tree, but of a green arbor, booth, or bower, suggesting

the green bower in which the king, all over

the ancient world, sat at the New Year to

represent the first man in the garden.178 This is indicated in Coffin Text 187: “He made

me to sit in the booth at the entrances of the horizon of heaven. I found Khonsu on the

way; he came down to Punt” 179 and there organized the subject’s family and followers

for him.

Early Egyptologists did not hesitate to

recognize in the Egyptian funeral garden a

true Eden. It is the greenest of green places,

a paradise of plants; turquoise and evergreen

predominate. 180 The temple groves were meant to convey a sense of overpowering

vegetable exuberance. 181 Lefébure noted that all the various pictures of paradise are

gardens, the idea of an “Éden végétal” being

as natural to the Egyptians as it is to us or to

any primitives. The Field of Rest and of

Reeds is not only a paradise of plants, but a

paradise for plants, without whose

exuberance and joy no paradise could be

complete. 182 And this paradise of plants is also a paradise of animals; at the creation Re

commanded that “a Field of Repose be stretched out, and so the Field of Rest came

into being. There I will cause flowers of all

kinds to grow; and the Field of Rushes came

into being. I will place therein to inhabit it

all manner of living things which are

suspended in the heavens and the stars. … I

will place multitudes to worship me, and it

was done. ”183

In the great temple of Karnak, one enters

the main building by the Wȝḏy.t, the famous Hall of Columns, whose name means “green

room” or “paradise.” 184 Even so, in the Anchnesneferibre coffin, the candidate

passes to the next world by entering “the

palace with many plants.” 185 The reliefs at the Deir el-Bahri complex show that the

place was regarded as a kind of Garden of

Eden for gods and kings, imitated on a

modest scale in private funeral gardens. 186

The priest Petosiris complained in his day

that the general public had forgotten the true nature of the great park at Hermopolis: “I

took charge of the park, taking care lest it be

invaded (trampled) by the general public;

this because it was the place (house) of the

birth of all the gods, who took their

beginning (being) from this place, and

because vile people were trespassing in it,

tramping around with impunity, eating the

fruit of its trees, pulling up the rushes and

taking them home as they pleased.” 187 Yet

“this is the place where every creature came

into being. ”188 Making an amusement park of the place was not such a bad idea, however,

since Eden itself had been a place of

relaxation and delight; the folly was in

forgetting the sacred significance of the

place as the garden where the human race

began.

The Lady Offers Fruit

In the vignettes to chapter 58 in the Book of the Dead, we see the subject and his wife

together in a pleasant garden where they

drink the waters of a stream or pond at the

foot of a date palm; 189 at once one thinks of the waters of life and the tree of life. Indeed,

Frankfort suggested that “the trees, which

symbolised natural life eternally renewed,”

in the cenotaph of Seti I, “were meant to go

down with their roots” to a canal dug to

represent “the waters from which all natural

life had sprung.” 190 In the next scene, however, another kind of tree is shown as

we see Ani alone, appearing here for the

first time without his wife, as he approaches

a sycamore tree from whose branches the

lady Nut hands him fruit to eat—and the

Lady is the exact image of his wife.191 In another tomb the wife, who is drinking of the

same water as her husband, wears (in this

scene only) a wig identical with that of the

goddess who is handing food and water from the top of the tree while two ba- birds,

having human heads “correspond[ing]

exactly to those of the two dead people,”

perch on the tree, which is a strange mixture

of date and sycamore.192 The initiate identifies himself with the keeper of the

garden, the guardian of the seven edible

things in the temple, as he eats “in the booths

beneath the branches of the sycamores of

Hathor.” 193 The Lady receives him with food: “I have come; the Great Lady has

opened to me. I have released my abundance

(determinative of a man scattering meal); I

have opened the leaves of the Itf-rr.t

(turquoise lady).” 194 As “the Beloved One, the Lady of the Fruit, who brings to thee that

which thou lovest,” she offers the traveler in

the Amduat “the nourishment which the trees

bear for thee.” 195 “O Lord, come to thy domain ( ḥsw.t); … the spirits (or strength,

bȝw) in the trees offer to thee to take freely of the fruit that the trees hold forth to

thee.” 196 In rites at Denderah the lady Hathor says to the pharaoh, “I give thee the

countryside ( sḫ.t), which brings forth groves for thee with their lovely gifts, for thy

dwelling,” while Horus says to the king, “I

give thee all the orchards of this land to

make thee happy.” 197 From the water and the earth come forth “all living things, that thou

mayest partake thereof and flourish thereby,

going forth to live on whatever pleases thee,

… breathing the air.” 198 In the Ramesseum drama the king finds himself resting beneath

the “pleasant ( ỉmȝ)-trees, whose shade is

most welcome, and whose fruit is sweet

( bnr) and delicious to the taste ( nḏm). ”199

The permission given Adam to eat of all the

trees is also suggested by the declaration in

Book of the Dead 124: “I will eat my food

under the foliage of trees with whose lovely

branches (arms) I am familiar.” 200

Figure 96. The ship in which Horus fuses with Re

represents transition from one state to another, from the state of death (below) to life in heaven (like most Egyptian temple walls and coffins, this scene reads from the bottom upward). Between, the passage is

represented by the symbol and hieroglyph ḫpr,

meaning “to become” or pass from one state to

another. The butterfly wings (astonishingly like those found on Mesoamerican temple reliefs) dramatically illustrate drastic change of form while preserving individual identity. P. Louvre N. 3092 (BD 125). After Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, pl. CXXXIII.

Transformations

Line 37: “Thy ba is deified (being sanctified, made divine) in the duat, being about to make whatever transformation

( ḫprw) it desires”

A ḫpr is a change of form without a change of identity (fig. 96). 201 Such a transformation signifies not a loss, but a heightening, of the

ego; whether we think of eternal or mortal

life, it is always a process of change: “The

[Egyptian] lives in a world of ceaseless

‘transformations’ ( ḫprw) ; everything is always passing away and returning” 202—

change is one of the basic facts of life.203

Hence the demonstrated ability to change

form while preserving one’s conscious

identity is a supreme triumph and

satisfaction, an affirmation and

intensification of the self, as Hermann Kees

and Morenz have maintained. 204 “Life itself

… as an onflowing course from station to station, from degree to degree, has its

similitude in every Egyptian temple

passage.” 205 In passing from station to station, assuming the proper ḫprw as one

advances, one shows himself a complete

master of the difficult problem of surviving

under all conditions, 206 taking whatever form is necessary to meet any conceivable

challenge, whether that means becoming a

divine hawk, a flame, a wing, a storm,

Hathor herself, a water-bird, wheat, etc. 207

During these changes, however, nothing

could be farther from the Egyptian mind than

to become an animal. Long ago Gaston

Maspero showed that the ḫprw have nothing

whatever to do with reincarnation.208 It is true that nature does show the way; an early

Greek observer says that the Egyptians have

a special reverence for animals that are able

to change from one type ( genos) to

another.209 These changes in nature are incredible but real, the best-known and

among the most paradoxical examples being

supplied by the frog and the butterfly. In

Egypt the favorite symbol of ḫpr, and the hieroglyph whose name is ḫpr, is the scarab, or dung beetle, which suddenly appears in

the places of burial, “coming into existence”

without any apparent cause or creator, 210 and hence qualifies as a holy entity, “the Living

One,” “He who came forth (from himself),”

like the sun itself.211 But the transformations of a human being during his lifetime, the

“seven ages” of man, are hardly less

impressive than some of nature’s other

tricks: the infant is drastically different from

an adolescent, who in turn differs from an

old man as one species from another; and yet

through it all one and the same ego asserts its

identity, so that, as Thausing points out,

“assuming whatever form one pleases … is

no rebirth, but the expression of the complete freedom of the ba.” 212 Of course, if according to the common formula the forms

taken are those which “one pleases,” the

ḫprw, as Federn points out, are necessarily voluntary and therefore entirely desirable

experiences, designed to express the highest

form of self-assertion. 213

The most difficult ḫpr to understand and

explain is naturally the first one, which is

why the self-creating beetle scores so high.

The ḫpr is an embryonic concept, like the egg in the Petosiris inscription; in the

opening passage of our Breathings book the

owner asks to undergo the ḫprw of Osiris at various levels of sun, moon, and stars “in the

womb of Nut” (lines 2–3). In the formula, “I

am Khepri in the morning, Re at noon, and

Atum in the evening,” 214 Khepri comes first as the sun in his moment ( ḫpr) of coming into being. 215 Others follow: “I am Thoth, the

eldest son of Re, whom Atum begot, who arose out of Khepri. … I have come down to

earth with the secrets of the ‘Horizon-

one.’”216 Morenz finds this to be a singularly un-Egyptian passage, and yet the word for

“begot” is written with the foxtail talisman,

which is also the symbol of transformation

or transition, 217 while the horizon is par excellence the symbol or the moment of

passage from one place or state to another,

i.e., of ḫpr. 218

Ḫpr is especially associated with rites of initiation; according to Raymond Faulkner’s Concise Dictionary, ḫpr means “come into

being, become, change, grow up, occur,

happen, come to pass, take place, be

effective, go by, be past, … continue,

exist,” 219 and has, according to the Wörterbuch, an active sense of “doing something, starting something, creating,

begetting.” 220 The expression ỉrỉ ḫprw that

occurs in our text means “cause to ḫpr,” and in the form ỉr.t ḫprw m suggests “formation into,” “entering the form of ( Gestaltung in) , ”

or “formation of,” according to Federn, 221

who detects in ḫprw voluntary and therefore desirable experiences which, in the Book of

the Dead, are equivalent to “initiation. ”222

The expression ḫpr sšt.ỉ in line 4 above

corresponds to ḫpr m sš, which means “to be or become something,” and which Federn

renders as “‘identification,’ ‘initiation,’

spells, … joining some ‘secret society’ (or

religious community) in this world in order

to be ready to join the elect in the other

world after death,” 223 thus clearly designating this Book of Breathings as an

initiation text, and so confirming the use of

the word snsn as indicating initiation into a sacred community. 224 Thausing interprets ỉrỉ

ḫprw as “the achievement ( Vollziehen) of transformation,” the “Zwischenstadium,” a

point reached in the process of initiatory rites and the forms corresponding to those

stages. Ḫprw, having an active as well as a stative sense, indicates “forms, stages of

growth, becoming,” 225 and also the activity involved in passing through them.

There are sixty transformations mentioned

in the Coffin Texts and only twelve in the

Book of the Dead, the latter being the twelve

forms Re takes in the course of his

journey. 226 It has been suggested that the ḫprw were originally derived from

observation of the visible changes undergone

by the solar disk from its rising to its

setting, 227 so that whatever form the dead may take, all are symbols of the eternal life

of the sun. 228 Yet the nature of the changes described as ḫprw suggests not so much the distant and intangible view of the sun as

intimate and organic doings of the growing

embryo, which, as everyone knows, passes

through the most astonishing series of transformations. The ḫprw are “an alchemy

of being … the itinerary of mutations of the

soul.” 229 The initiatory transformations referred to in line 4 of our text correspond to

those undergone by the corpse in the coffin,

where it quickly changes name and nature,230

the coffin itself being designated as the

womb of Nut. Such transformations were

made possible only “by literally undergoing

all the experiences of Osiris,” 231 those experiences being his ḫprw.

Every birth requires a gestation period,

whether it is our birth into this world from a

preexistent state or our birth into the next

after leaving this one. Since “the morning of

rebirth repeats the creation, … the night-

place is the world before creation, the ‘first

time,’” 232 the waters of nw, the dark womb of Nut. To this we return to be born again,

resuming the prenatal stage of the great god

Khepri, the god who is ready to be born.233

The paradoxical identity of dark womb and

starry heavens—as wide a contrast as can

well be imagined—is forced on us by the

image of a prenatal existence in a state of

celestial glory, a well-known gnostic

concept. The way of life “goes from the

spirit world into the depths, … [only to]

mount up again (through the waters) to

heaven ([represented by the]

constellations).” 234 Hence Nut herself is a sort of “Book of the Order and Motion of the

Stars.” 235 Recently Max Guilmot has emphasized the importance of distinguishing

two different types of ḫprw: (l) that into some bird or beast, etc., as a magical means

of escaping danger, and (2) that into some

life form, such as an ear of wheat, which

aims at absorption into the universe or a

“cosmic communion.” 236

Adam’s Dominion: The Initiate as Lord of Plants and Animals

There are some passages in the Coffin

Texts that strikingly call to mind the biblical

Adam’s taking possession of the garden.

Because of their interest to Latter-day Saints,

they deserve quotation at some length.

Coffin Text 75: “I came into being

( ḫpr.n=ỉ, took my present form) from the

members of the great god who was self-

existent (who came into being of himself).

He created me in his heart (mind); he made

me in his glory; he breathed me (my life)

from his nose. I am a god whose (four) forms

were breathed forth (or who breathes forth

forms).” 237 “He created me in his own heart, he made me in his glory, before my mother

bore me (?).” 238 “There was made for me plants in the garden of st.t (the East); I became the provider of bread for the gods. I

am in the midst of going the rounds, Lord of the green garden239 in the Dat. O Atum-Re, O

Nw! I set forth food offerings, which Ḥw has caused to flourish (be green) for Osiris. ”240

Coffin Text 80: “I am the Living One, the

Lord of Years (ancient of days), who lives

for time and eternity, whom Atum made ( ỉr,

begot) (as) the eldest one in his glory

… when he was one and became three, at the

time he separated the earth (Geb) from

heaven (Nut), before the bringing forth of the

first flesh, before the first mother … when

all were together with me in his presence.

He brought me forth ( or conceived me) from his nose.241 I came forth from his nostrils; he placed me upon his breast (neck), unwilling

that I be separated from him. My name lives

as Son of the God of the preexistence. I live

in the members of my father Atum. I am the

Living One whom … Atum begot with Nepre

(the gardener), when he had me descend to

this earth, even the isle of flame (oxygen), when my name became (was changed to)

Osiris son of Earth (Geb). I am the Living

One242 for whom the expanse of the heaven and the broad earth were made, that the

offerings of the ordinance (or plan) might be

through me to God. My father Atum

embraced ( snsn) me when he came forth

from the eastern horizon, his heart was

pleased to see me. (Then) he proceeded

satisfied (in peace) toward the western

horizon; and he will meet (find) me (again)

in his way.” 243

The initiate then describes himself briefly

as a creator and preserver of life, and he

continues: “May the falcons and the birds

live, the jackals and the swine of the desert,

the hippopotamuses in their pools, mankind

amid their grainfields, crocodiles and fishes

whatsoever are in the waters of the Nile,244

even as Atum has commanded. I lead them; I

give them life by my mouth as it were, my life is in their nostrils; I lead them while my

breath(s) is in their throats. I sustain their

life ( lit. tie on their heads) by the

authoritative word ( Ḥw) which is in (upon) my mouth. My father Atum who came from

the eastern horizon caused me to give life to

fishes and creeping things which are on the

surface of the earth (the back of Geb). I am

truly the Living One under Nut (under the

heavens, or married to Nut).” 245 Here the significance of the nose and mouth are

explained: the nose represents the breath of

life, the mouth, the power or authority to give

life. The initiate is given dominion and

responsibility for all God’s creatures.

Coffin Text 132: According to Siegfried

Schott, this is a drama. The speaker is the

man who wants his family “sealed to him.”

“I am Atum who created the Great Ones.” 246

“I am one of the Watchers who danced for

joy ( nhm). 247 I received my place to rest in accordingly as I went about exploring ( m

hh) , taking possession ( nhmnhm) , going the rounds (coming and going— dbn dbn). I have

assumed dominion ( ỉw pḥ.n=ỉ ) of my

domains (seats, places), I have toured ( swȝh) my domains, my groves, my pastures, my

places of delight (stopping places). I am in

authority ( ỉw wsr=ỉ ) , my staff is in my hand; my word is that of command of Ḥw ( rȝ=ỉ m Ḥw), who accompanies me ( sšm.w my sw) .

My two arms are raised to the gods in

sacrifice, even the sacrifice of oxen to the

Lord of Heliopolis. I am with those who are

bound248 for sacrifice, inasmuch as I am verily the bread of Re, exhausted by wounds.

I have been given strength and wisdom; I sit

with my back to the earth (Geb). … I have

come forth that my family be given to me: my

sons and daughters, my brothers and sisters,

my father, my mother, and all who are bound

to me;249 that my people who have been bound may be liberated to me, and come to

receive my embrace.250 … O ye who are among their ancestors, whose names are

hidden to me, I have the written documents

(that say) ‘I begot him.’” 251 There is much more to this effect.

Coffin Text 136: The title of this text is

“To unite families in the next world. I am

Atum whom the Great Ones created (or, who

created the Great Ones).252 … I took my lands and received my fields in the place of

my repose; mine are the meadows of taking-

possession, like those who go about in the

land laying claim (or ever making the

rounds). I have taken possession of it even to

the edge of the desert. I have made a tour of

inspection, through my gardens, my groves,

my meadows and plots, the staff of authority

(or green branch) in my hand.253 I have distributed my good things to the Lords of

praise-offerings. My mouth is Ḥḥ; I bring (lead, conduct) most gently ( nfr nfr) . I am the mightiest of the mighty. … I lead the

sacrificial beasts at Heliopolis, I have

power over them, and they do not have

power over me. They atone for me ( lit.

cover my name, cf. Hebrew kippēr); they

hide my weakness. I sit with my back to the

earth.” 254

In such passages we may see something of

the Eden situation transferred to the rites of

Heliopolis. Federn’s suggestion that the

common and unpleasant insistence on not

eating excrement really indicates abstention

from cereal foods255 and is in agreement with the teaching of certain ancient sectaries

that man was condemned to eat grain after

his expulsion from Eden as a sign of his

fallen state—wheat is par excellence the

food of man during his mortal earthly life.256

Federn goes further to suggest that the

strange but common wish not to walk upside down means not being concerned at all with

such inverted values as concern about food

and drink.257

The Sacred Marriage (Hieros

Gamos) in the Garden

It is the ished-tree growing “in the Field of Turquoise … in the midst of Heliopolis”

(i.e., in the temple garden)258 that brings Amun and Nut (Min and Isis, Atum and

Seshat, i.e., the king’s first parents and the

first pair on the earth) together at the New

Year—the time of the creation—to write the

king’s name on the leaves of the sacred tree

itself. 259

With the eating of the fruit goes dalliance

in the garden, preparatory to the sacred

marriage—the hieros gamos, which is never failing from creation and vegetation rites.

The garden is the proper place for dalliance;

the idea that the divine marriage must take place in a grove is found all over the

world, 260 and Päivö Oksala has shown the close affinity of the earliest Greek and

Roman traditions on the subject with those of

Egypt, specifically of Alexandria. 261 The place where Osiris and Isis consorted in the

beginning was on a sacred island containing

a hallowed grove dominated by the mente-

tree, where all human trespassing, talking,

hunting, fishing, and even music were

forbidden; where stood 365 palm-decked

altars; and where “the waters never ceased

to flow.” 262 The Pyramid Texts recall such a place: “The king has bathed in the Field of

Rushes. The king’s hand is in Re’s hand. O

Nut, take his hand.” 263 At Hermopolis, “the Island of Embracing,” a green lotus land,

went back ritually to the Old Kingdom. 264

With the fruit of the garden, the Lady offers

her favors: “Thy mother Nut joins herself to

thee, she banishes thy sorrow … she embraces thee … the Beloved One, the Lady

of the Fruit, bringing to thee what thou

desirest.” 265 She is the Lady of Ammu, the pleasant trees; she is Neith with the

perfumed (or braided) hair, the Lady of the

sycamore and of the turquoise, making merry

in the garden among her dancing and singing

maidens. 266 The significance of the hairdo is seen in its imitation by the temple

hierodules. 267 While the Lady “makes the Two Lands verdant in her name of Edjo,” 268

her divine spouse “is he who fixes the earth

upon its foundations” 269 for the creation and the begetting and bringing forth of life must

go together. So, as the god makes his circuit

at the coronation (New Year, creation),

taking possession of the land in the manner

of Adam exploring the garden, he embraces

the Lady, whereupon life springs up out of

nothing, the earth bringing forth

spontaneously. 270 For “the lord of the cattle who tends the animals and cares for their

stalls in the shadow of the sycamore” is

“also in charge of the procreation of the

human race” ;271 in the temple rites his part is enacted by the king, in the role of the first

man, and the imagery is, as Otto puts it,

“more idyllic than divine and creative,”

showing him as a human being in a romantic

situation.272 He does all to please the Lady, working away as “the caretaker and

preserver of nature … who causes the

garden land to come into being … and

causes the trees to bloom. ”273 At the festival of the valley, the glorious lady rests with

uncovered face, awaiting the arrival of her

consort. 274 The rites end with a great acclamation of the divine pair: “The mother

comes fair of face, to mix the drinks.” Amon

comes rejoicing: “Hail Mother, Lady of

Heaven, Great Queen of All the Earth.

[Amon and Mut, Father and Mother,] give understanding and strength to the heart of the

ka of NN forever!” 275 Often, on the walls of the temple of Ramses II at Karnak, the king

offers flowers or fruits to a goddess under

various names, who is both mother and wife;

in plate 46 she is his real wife, and

sometimes she appears with her husband:

“Amun and Mut appear in their capacity as

the king’s parents in the forms of Min and

Isis,” hence also of Seshat and Atum, who

write his name on the ished-tree. 276 In return for his love gifts, Mut (the mother) promises

the king: “I give thee the life span of Re, the

years of Atum, peaceful dominion of all the

earth (lands), … the perfect health and joy of

Re.” 277

The liturgy of Papyrus Rhind is set in the

turquoise fields at the creation of the world

and the birth of nature, but it is in the form of

an authentic epithalamium, with all the

familiar terms of endearment and desire.278

In the Ramessid reliefs, the king is addressed

by “Hathor, the Lady of the Southern

Sycamore,” as “sweet lips,” as she tickles

his nose with the menat-necklace in the best Amarna tradition of dalliance. 279 As “Nut, the Great Lady of Heaven, Wife of the Two

Lands,” she receives from the king a gift of

perfume and gives him in return “all food”

and all life and health, while he calls her his

beloved.280 Aylward Blackman notes that

“the present state of our knowledge does not

permit us exactly to determine” the full

significance of flowers in the cult of the old

Egyptian divinities,281 but it would seem to be clear that the Lady finds flowers most

acceptable when she is in a relaxed and

festive, not to say tipsy, condition.282

Egyptian drawings of the Lady standing by a

sycamore tree on whose branches sits a

hoopoe bird283 take us at once into a

worldwide realm of romantic courtship tales, for the hoopoe (lapwing, Ar. hudhud) is the messenger bird who comes bearing

proposals of marriage from ancient kings to

great queens (the story of Solomon and the

queen of Sheba in Thaʿlabi being the one

most likely to occur to the student). 284

If this aspect of the ordinances is passed

over lightly in the snsn papyrus, it is

nonetheless referred to repeatedly; the whole

situation demands it, and the text is full of

unmistakable hints. Even at Denderah, where

the rites are depicted so fully and the

marriage motif is “inserted into the very

order of the cosmos,” it is treated lightly

and discreetly as “the most mysterious and inaccessible part of the whole rite.” 285 When the hero (Unas) enters into a new world of

light, a green and pleasant garden by the

water, “he symbolizes in himself the

awakening of nature in joy.” 286 And when

“the Beloved One, the Lady of the Fruit”

enters the Ḏr.t, she says, “I bring summer and winter. … I bring the nb-corn,” whereupon

her consort enters as “Lord of Embracing

( ḥp.t)” to the strains of the hymn, “O Lord, come to thy favorite (beloved, ḥsw.t).

… Receive the nourishment which the trees

bear for thee.” 287 It is clear from many reliefs and vignettes that the romantic

element that occasioned all manner of abuses

and “abominations of the ancients” among

other nations was never so debased in Egypt;

indeed, Herodotus observes that of all

ancient peoples only the Egyptians “in this as

in everything else take the utmost care to

preserve the propriety of their temples,” free

from any hint of licentiousness. 288

Throughout the ancient world, the ritual

marriage at the solstice or equinox takes

place in a ritual booth of green boughs, a fixture never missing from the “great

assembly.” In the archaic Egyptian rites the king was received by the “mistress of the

acacia-shrine,” which was the ladies’ booth

( Frauenzelt). 289 It was the royal baldachin, the ritual booth, tent, or shelter pitched in

green gardens by the waterside, whose rich

foliage proclaimed the king reclining in it to

be olbiodaimon, the giver and source of

abundance. 290 The idea was imported from Persia into the Greek world by Alexander,

according to Andreas Alföldi, 291 but is really as old in the West as in the East, 292 as can be seen from the rites of Anna Perenna at

Rome. In the Coffin Texts the hero who

passes through the glory of the stars into the

arms of Nut receives incense at the New

Moon and celebrates in “the divine

pavilion”; 293 and in the Ramesseum drama, a festival booth is erected for Isis beneath the

lovely ỉmȝ- trees. 294

In the sixteenth hour of his journey through

the underworld, the traveler consorts with

“the Beloved One, the Lady of the Fruit” in a

booth set up by the waterside. 295 As the patroness of all green and growing things in

the New Year, Isis takes the title of “Isis in

the Ḏbȝ.t, ” the word signifying a green

festival booth or hut. 296 In the royal park where the human race was begotten,

according to the Petosiris report, stood “the

pavilion of the goddesses,” the usual

sophisticated version of the primitive festal

booth.297 Adam built himself such a booth, 298

as did Abraham in his mystic garden at

Hebron, in faithful imitation of the Garden of

Eden. 299 It is not necessary to labor the theme: the familiar green booth in Egypt, as

elsewhere (the hieroglyphic symbol for the

sed- festival and the coronation is a double booth), signifies the same kinds of goings-on.

Indeed, the Egyptian word for such a booth,

sḥ, may be the same as the Hebrew sukkāh,

best known from the Feast of Booths, confirming the significance of the whole

business in the garden.

Forbidden Fruit

Pierre Montet has shown that every temple

in Egypt had its own version of the forbidden

fruit in its cult drama and that in the

beginning “all went back to a common and

very ancient concept.” 300 There is a Jewish tradition that it was by converting the fruit of

the tree into wine and offering it to her

husband in that form that Eve brought about

the fall. 301 Certainly it was the vine that was the forbidden fruit of our second parent,

Noah, who after he had completed his

strenuous passage through the waters found

only one plant growing on earth, from the

fruit of which he got drunk and misbehaved:

“he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and

he was uncovered within his booth”

(Genesis 9:21). And by this experience, according to a remarkable passage in

3 Baruch, Noah learned that all things have their opposites and that because of his fall a

Savior would be provided, so that in time

the fruit’s “bitterness shall be changed into

sweetness, … and that which is produced

from it [the wine] shall become the blood of

God.” 302 It was by this same fruit of the vine, according to the same source, that the

envious Satan (Samael) was able to seduce

Adam in the beginning. 303 John A. Bailey has pointed out that the knowledge acquired by

the fruit was not primarily carnal knowledge

at all but that it opened the door to something

far vaster and more far-reaching. “The

garden milieu provides an excellent setting

for a sexual initiation, to be sure,” he

observes, 304 but that is only part of the story; it was not sex but “knowledge of good and

evil” that the pair obtained, 305 meaning

knowledge of “everything possible”:306 “The initiation of the woman and the man focuses

on their pursuit of the widest possible

knowledge.” 307 It is the woman who takes the initiative from the first, “due to her

refusal to accept the limitations of humanity,”

so that “the woman is both the initiator of the

man and at the same time she is initiated,

along with him, into the knowledge of good

and evil,” 308 which is to say, that the woman was led into it by her desire to become as

one of the gods, knowing good from evil

(Genesis 3:5–6).

To match the Noah story, the Egyptians had

a very old legend that told how a woman

was sent forth to discover the land of Egypt

while it was still under the waters of a flood

that had destroyed the human race, which had

rebelled against God and been destroyed (cf.

Abraham 1:23–24). The destroying flood

was ritually enacted by the woman in the

pouring out of seven thousand jars of wine at Heliopolis, the first land to emerge after the

flood, after which she and her ladies drank

wine and celebrated the forgiveness and

restoration of the human race to the earth. 309

The Egyptian priests taught that wine made

men wild and drunken because the vine grew

up and was nourished in soil fertilized by the

blood of the wicked and rebellious human

race, which had aforetime been destroyed

for rebelling against God; for this reason the

priests of Egypt were strictly rationed in

their consumption of wine, and in early times

the pharaoh could not touch it at all.310

Noah’s getting drunk in the booth (Hebrew

sukkāh, e.g., Egyptian sḥ) is a reminder that for the Egyptians Dionysus is not only the

god of wine, but of all liquid nature, and

stands for the inundation. 311 In a true dionysiac, Noah, after partaking of the vine,

was found naked and had his shame covered

by that same garment with which Adam covered his—the garment of the priesthood,

about which early Jewish sources have much

to say that cannot be followed up here; but

the situation is faithfully reflected in the

remarkable late-Egyptian stories of Setne.

If, as Montet has shown, there definitely

was a forbidden fruit in the Egyptian

tradition, László Kákosy made it no less

apparent that there was a fall. 312 The picture of the king as the benevolent ruler, taking

charge of the animals and helping trees and

vegetation to flourish, “the caretaker and

preserver of nature,” bringing bouquets to

please his fair companion, 313 is the image of an age of pastoral innocence, “a paradisiacal

Urzeit, when the ‘world before the creation’

knew no sin.” 314 The first thing the Egyptian sleeper sees upon awakening is the woman,

whom he “knows,” thereby becoming man in

the highest sense while still in a state of

innocence.315 But we see him next “(come forth out of) the grove. He has partaken of

( lit. swallowed) its fruit. He has received his head and joined together his bones.

… Nothing about him is as it was before.”

For better or for worse, he has undergone a

complete physical change, and that after

taking certain fruit (a green amulet),316 given him by his wife in a garden, after which he

leaves said garden. Down to modern times,

barren women in Egypt have been wont to

seek fertility by stepping over a cone-shaped

stone at the foot of a sacred tree, eating one of the dates of the tree at the same time.

Winifred Blackman compares this with Isis’s

visit to Osiris at the ỉwy-tree in the sacred garden on the island of Biga, the place of the

beginning, and notes that it is still believed

that the spirit of the hero is in the tree, even

as the ba of Osiris was. 317 The Book of the Dead vignettes showing the Lady

incorporated—all but her upper part, and in many cases all but her arms only—in the

fruit-bearing tree suggested to Maspero that

the woman in the tree must actually have

been eaten by it;318 she is the first victim, so to speak, and now invites her male

companion to share her condition.

The preceding account of the drama in the

garden receives partial substantiation from

many sources. One of the most interesting is

the Tale of Setne, which its editor, Francis

Ll. Griffith, calls “one of the finest works of

imagination that Egypt has bequeathed to

us,” 319 warning us at the same time that “we must not look for history here,” the only

alternative to history in 1900 being

literature, 320 and quite overlooking the ritual significance of things the present generation

of scholars almost instinctively looks for.

The story comes to us in two versions,

designated by Griffith as the First and

Second Tales of Khamuas, from the same time and place as the Book of Breathings:

Thebes in “the last century of Ptolemaic rule

and [or] the first century of the Roman

Empire” ;321 like the Book of Breathings, it is a remarkable time binder, the Second Tale of

Khamuas being “linguistically … related

about as closely to New Egyptian of the

twelfth century B.C. as to the Biblical Coptic

of the fourth or fifth century A.D.” 322 The legend supplies a version of the garden

episode just treated that confirms the reality

and structure of the latter as we have

presented it. It is the last episode that

concerns us here.

Because of his presumption in taking the

Book of Knowledge, which was guarded by

the endless serpent, the hero, Setne, must be

disciplined. One day in the court of the

temple of Ptah, he sees a fair damsel with a

train of fifty-two attendants (this cosmic

number keeps popping up), falls hopelessly in love with her, and sends a servant to offer

her gold for her favors. 323 She will meet him only at Per-Bast (the House of Bast), she

being the daughter of the priest of Bast (the

cat that slays the serpent under the ished-

tree).324 Against all advice (the people were scandalized), 325 he goes to Per-Bast in a boat, landing in a garden where stands a very

high house or tower (the Joseph and Asenath

motif); the lady comes down and welcomes

him, leading him by the hand into a green

booth—a room in the tower all of lapis

lazuli and turquoise: a “greenroom.” 326

There she offers him wine in a golden cup

and invites him to eat. He refuses at first, but

she wins out. 327 Setne then wants to make love, but the lady insists first on a signed

marriage contract deeding all he owns to

her.328 Then she puts on “a garment of royal linen,” and at the sight of her Setne goes

quite out of his head, even agreeing to the extermination of his children in favor of hers

(the old Egyptian tension between patriarchy

and matriarchy).329 He hardly embraces the woman before he falls unconscious but then

awakens to find himself alone and naked. 330

At this point he becomes aware of “a noble

person … like a Pharaoh” approaching but

shrinks from meeting him: “For shame he

could not rise because there was no clothing

upon him.” 331 It seems that the person is Pharaoh (impersonating the god), who asks

the cowering hero, “Setne, why are you in

this condition? … Have you drunk the

wine?” 332 Setne tells him what happened with the lady333 and blames Ne-nefer-kaPtah, who spitefully placed the woman in his

way. To this the god replies: “I warned thee

that they would slay thee if thou shouldst

ever take the Book of Knowledge,” but “until

this time thou gavest no heed.” 334 However,

he promises Setne relief, instructing him to

go to Memphis, where he can at last find his

children restored to life and embrace

them.335 Pharaoh at the same time gives new clothing to Setne, who at last obediently

carries out his orders. 336 As a penitent he returns the book to its proper place, “with a

fork ( wʿ.t̂ šlte.t—cf. Hebrew šeleṭ) and a stick ( šbte—Hebrew šebeṭ) in his hand and a censer of fire ( ʿḫ n ste.t—or sword of

fire? Cf. late Egyptian ȝḫ.t, knife)337 on his head.” 338 Griffith would derive the name Setne from the title of the sem-priest, who, as we have seen, was the most active

participant in the temple drama. 339

Figure 97. While the Lady supervises, the cat (who

represents her) dispatches the serpent with a sword beneath a sacred tree. A common scene in Book of

the Dead 17. TCD MS 1661/1 by permission of

Board of Trinity College Dublin.

Whether this is a priestly or a popular

rehash of the garden story, the important

elements are all there in their proper order

with the usual overlapping (the story is told

twice of the wise woman and the foolish

man), confusion, and rationalization. Thus a

book of knowledge is certainly more logical than a tree of knowledge; then there is the showdown with the serpent who guarded the

book, and finally the sword and fire

reminiscent of the flaming sword of Genesis

3:24.

The Serpent

Only by the exercise of self-restraint have

we avoided any mention of the serpent up to this point, for the snake plays a major role in

the drama—or is, rather, a standard fixture, as indispensable as the tree itself. In the

Setne story he is the guardian of the Book of

Knowledge and the mortal enemy of aspiring

mankind. A common vignette from the Book

of the Dead shows a large serpent, which a

cat is beheading with a big sacrificial knife

under a tree (fig. 97). 340 It is the sun-god or a goddess beheading Apophis beneath the

ished-tree of Heliopolis. 341 Thus the cat who split the ished-tree and released the god also beheads the god’s mortal enemy, the

Apophis-serpent, beneath the same ished-

tree. In Book of the Dead 149, the candidate

proclaims in a single breath that he is the

possessor of the garden who “knows the two

sycamores of malachite, between which Re

emerges from the sowing of Shu” (his

father), the sunrise being compared with his

birth from the trees, and at the same time that

he is “the king who frees the land from

Apophis,” the serpent. 342 As no Egyptian temple could be without its holy tree and

garden, neither could it be without its sacred

serpent.343

The serpent is the negation of all things344

and the archenemy of the human race. 345 His mighty power is only for destruction, for “he

can beget nothing” and so lives by trickery

and violence. 346 It is the fatal bite of the serpent that reduces Re himself to the

extremity of helplessness. 347 He is “the dangerous one, who as a serpent was

dangerous to Horus,” whom he bit, though in

recompense the sandal of Horus treads on

the serpent. 348 In the Metternich Stela the victim is promised that the serpent’s tooth

cannot prevail against him in the end because

he possesses “the same seed as that which is

in the Creator of All.” 349 In the end the snake is always the loser, but only after reducing

man to the point of death. As Reymond reconstructs the earliest temple rites, as soon

as the gods are settled happily in their

garden home, the adversary appears as a

serpent.350 There is a showdown, with the falcon Horus leading the fight, 351 and after the monster is defeated, the place is

“purified ( twr) for Rēʿ and he [becomes] the lord of that place ( bw).” 352 For Reymond, the temple is par excellence “the place

where the snake was pierced. ”353 At Heliopolis, Atum in the beginning won his

earthly inheritance in a showdown with a

primal serpent, and Re as a great cat slew

the children of the serpent ( bdš.t, the

helpless one). 354 The serpent is the supreme obstacle to the progress of the sun in his

course and the initiate on his ritual journey.

In the Book of Two Ways also, the “villain is

the serpent Apophis.” 355 In Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, The Book of Overthrowing

Apophis and the Names of Apophis include a long and horrendous catalogue of the

serpent’s evil qualities and the terrible

punishments inflicted upon him.356 Everyone must face him in the initiation as “the

principle of evil, … Apophis, Ṯtff, Ḏw-ḳd,

Nḥȝ-ḥr, Njk, etc. ”357 He represents the

“irrational and bestial” side of human nature,

which every man must recognize and

overcome in himself. 358 In the Ramesseum drama, as Horus is being instructed in the

garden, the adversary appears as Seth; the

contest between them is represented by

treading on grain, bringing about the death of

Osiris, whom Horus then seeks to avenge on

the serpent. 359 There are many variations on the theme, but always the serpent represents

the destruction and passing away of all

things, “a symbol of eternal motion [and]

also the ‘power of the abyss,’ which must be

overcome. ”360 He is the corruption of all

things physical, the destruction of men’s bodies but not of their spirits. Accordingly,

when he is overcome, in the ninth hour of the

Amduat, the posterity of Re stand “adorned

in their garments … in their own flesh. … It

is they who repel every serpent. … They are

the lords of life, holding the scepter.” 361

But the main altercation is between the

Lady and the serpent; it is the woman who in

the end confounds and accuses him.362 In the Osiris drama the Lady is first pursued by the

serpent, which is then cut up (in the form of a

rope) by the followers of Osiris. 363 She is his most dangerous adversary. 364 In the Metternich Stela, when Isis curses the

serpent and renders its venom harmless, she

tells a Pandora story which makes it appear

that the woman is under obligation to reverse

the mischief of the snake because she

subjected man to it in the first place; in the

story, while a faithful lady guards “the House

of the Married Women,” a dangerous “Delta Girl” opens the door and lets in the serpent,

who bites the son of the house. 365 He is rescued from death by the other lady, who

hails him as “mighty Phoenix” (the

resurrected one) and reminds him of his

divine lineage, which in the end guarantees

his immortality. 366 When Horus is bitten by the serpent in Syria (for the motif seems to

be of non-Egyptian origin), Isis teaches him

the antidote, which enables him to tread on

the head of the serpent. 367 The first sacrificial scene of the Opening of the Mouth

harks back to the controversy of Horus and

Seth, in which Isis, in a tree, outwits the

adversary and taunts him, “Weep for thyself!

… Thine own cleverness hath been thine

undoing.” 368 Much is made of this cleverness and its frustration in the popular tale of the

Papyrus Chester Beatty I, where Hathor finds

and heals Horus after Seth has wounded him

beneath the šn-wšʿ-tree. 369 While the woman is clever and wise, Typhon, the adversary, is

blind in trying to defeat her by preaching all

manner of false doctrine, misrepresenting the

sacred teaching which she has given to the

initiates. 370 The purification of Pharaoh ends with a solemn processional hymn that calls

upon the lady Nephthys to come and purify

the king from the curse of the serpent; Schott

confesses that he cannot imagine why a lady

should be summoned for this—but there she

is.371 “I know the true reason for the punishing of Apophis,” says the candidate in

the Book of the Dead. “It was Atum … it

was Hathor, the Lady of the Evening. ”372 In the Metternich Stela it is Isis who heals the

serpent’s bite, 373 and Nut, who is the beginning of all things, annihilates Apophis

and his hosts.

As in the Old Testament, the serpent has a

strangely ambivalent significance. Like the

crocodile representing the passage of time,374 he consumes and destroys all physical and corruptible stuff and is thereby

the agent of destruction;375 he is Ouroboros , the serpent with his tail in his mouth, who

destroys his own substance,376 a very ancient concept in Egypt enjoying special popularity

in Roman times and among the early

Christians. 377 But at the same time, without his offices the stuff could never change to

incorruptibility; hence in the end he performs

a salutary function. As it was by a serpent

that the children of Israel were smitten in the

desert, so it was by a serpent that they were

healed. It is the serpent who defeats the

serpent.378 The caduceus, the sign of the two interlaced serpents, was the sign of

Asculapius, who healed the dead; one

signifies death, the other life, and they are

intertwined in life-giving copulation.379

Since it is necessary in the course of life that

all physical things pass away to be reprocessed for an ever higher existence, the

serpent’s office is indispensable. All over

the ancient Near East, in fact, “serpent

images are associated with the god of the

opening year” as bringer of light, electrical

storms, and vegetation, 380 exactly as among the present-day Pueblo Indians. Kákosy

suggests that the Ouroboros is at one and the

same time the “symbol not only of eternity

and of the universe but also of the passing

away of evil spirits ( génies malfaisants)

and of their self-destruction. ”381 By beheading a huge serpent beneath the ished-

tree, the Lady, in the form of a cat, opens the

way for one to proceed on the journey of

initiation, passing through the lake of flame

and thence on to the highest heaven. 382 It was only through working with the serpent that

the Lady, in the story of Isis and Re, was

able to share in Re’s deepest secret and so

save him and advance herself; in one account she actually makes a serpent of clay to bite

Re, forcing him to call an assembly of all the

gods and there call upon her to reverse the

evil done by the serpent. 383 Though she heals him of the serpent’s bite, the Lady also

worships the Horus-child, who sits within

the circle of a serpent biting its own tail;

these “represent symbolically the eternal life

of the sun. ”384 They are also the symbol of the endless changing of matter into other

forms of matter, as well as of the serpent’s

frustration. 385

In laying her hand upon the afflicted one,

Isis, “by the power of Geb” rather than her

own, rebukes by name each of the serpent’s

seven poisons, corresponding to the seven

blows of death, which she thereby

reverses.386 The idea of an atonement is apparent in the regulation that if Pharaoh has

knowingly or unknowingly taken life by the

shedding of blood, he must atone for it ( entsühnen) by making a sacrifice, “by

which sacrifice he is purified of the serpent

which has defiled him before the gods,” the

guilt being now on the serpent’s head. 387

Punishment of the Serpent

We often read of the condign punishment

the serpent must undergo for attempting to

frustrate the progress of the god on his

journey or the initiate on his way. In the

Anchnesneferibre coffin, the “Great Ones”

who are “in the palace of many plants”

prepare the candidate “to equip herself with

the teachings [of Osiris]” ;388 someone then makes a formal report to Atum: “Behold … I

have organized ( dm.n=i) many things.

… Then I have driven out [the serpent]

Apophis and have healed the wounds” ;389

then Sia is ordered by Atum to guard the

place with fire. 390 The usual punishment is

for the serpent to be deprived of his arms and legs when he is driven out; he is to go

with his vulnerable head in the dust, an

outcast from the presence of Re: “Back[,]

Apophis, enemy of Re, thou who hast no

arms[,] who hast no legs! Thou hast not the

body with which thou wast born. … Thou

enemy, depart from Re! … May thy head be

smitten when thy condemnation is carried

out! Thou shalt not raise thy head. … May

thy nature be overthrown by the sword of the

great god; … mayest thou be placed upon thy

head—do not raise thy head! Lose thy way

and sorrow; do not rejoice!” 391 In the Book of Gates the expulsion of the serpent is

repeated at a number of gates; as he is driven

from the garden, the magistrates say, “May

you be bewitched in order that you may be

impotent,” while Atum, standing by, says,

“My father is justified against you and so am

I. … I dismiss you on behalf of Re. … Your

head is cut off, Apophis, after your coils have been cut. … We consign you to your

destruction! ”392 But at the next gate the story is repeated: there is another garden scene,393

eating of bread by the man ( hy) and woman

(Maat), and then another banishing of the

serpent: “May thine arms be hidden.

… Keep the serpent in custody! … Fetter

him that my glory may prevail. ”394 Then a third time, we behold a ritual eating “under a

leafy roof,” or ritual booth, 395 and again the serpent is expelled: “Hey, rebel, who

engaged in evil, Apophis, who has been the

cause of evil, your face is destroyed. … Hey,

you have been expelled, you, who are to be

destroyed! ”396 In the Overthrow of Apophis, the great serpent is smitten in nine things and

denied the ten things necessary for proper

existence; he is deprived of his physical

body, 397 arms, legs, and strength of heart; 398

he is cut to pieces399 and slain a second time on an altar of fire;400 his head is crushed; 401

his tail is placed in his mouth to signify that

he is his own enemy and that he makes no

progress; 402 and above all, his children will never inherit and his seed will never

increase—he has no future, 403 no progeny;404

for having rebelled, he is deprived of arms,

legs, and posterity. 405 “O serpent, without his two arms, without his two legs, fall upon thy

face!” 406 In fact, he can never produce anything. 407 Never again can he be a match for man, who has both limbs and the power

to reproduce. 408 Man remains his master and archenemy: “I am the man who covers thy

head, while I remain unharmed. … What is

that thing which creeps on its belly? ”409 It is he “whose arms are hidden [i.e., who “has

neither arms nor legs,” as Jan Zandee

explains], 410 whose legs are hidden,

… serpent of the black head.” 411 In the end, man is the victor: “Thou passest through the

waters of Re. … Now thou livest as ‘flesh’

upon the earth which is sanctified unto thee.

… Thou wanderest through the fields ( or

garden). … Thou shinest in the name of ‘He

who drove out the One with the Hidden

Arms!’ Bring light into the darkness, that the

‘flesh’ might be renewed!” 412

The loss of limbs and organs guarantees

that the rebel will never rise anew in his full

powers, which he will never possess

again. 413 He may never more progress, being

“bound by Aker, deprived of arms and legs,

bound in one place” —as Re “inflicts the

blows decreed for him.” He is overthrown

on his back; his face is crushed because of

what he has done. 414 The healing blows are administered in reverse, 415 making them the blows of death, following the same order as

in the Opening of the Mouth but with reverse

effect.416 Meanwhile, man is triumphant:

“What is that thing, that spirit that goes on its

belly, on the back of its spine? Behold, I

walk, and thy power is mine! … [Re] is kind

to me when he walks through this heaven in

the evening. But thou art fettered. What was

commanded to be done to thee aforetime hath

been done.” 417 The serpent has become an un-thing, having no arms and legs; he is sfg,

which Sethe interprets as “mysterious,

abnormal,” and Kees as “having a hidden

form, a secret nature,” an uncanny, sinister,

repellent creature with which humans cannot

easily communicate. 418 There is total enmity between the two species, and “Seth turned

himself into a roaring serpent” in an attempt

to stir up confusion and intimidate the

king. 419 If this is symbolic, it is not entirely so, for the enmity between man and serpent

—a creature especially virulent in Egypt—is

real.

In Egypt, as elsewhere, the role of the snake is both good and bad. In the same

breath he is called the holy snake and the

“wicked one.” 420 The concept of passing through the serpent, Re being “in his

serpent,” 421 strikingly resembles the Hopi idea, even as Egyptian snake rituals have

much in common with the Hopi snake dance

(where serpent and tree are closely

bound). 422 As Thausing sees it, “the initiate goes ‘through the body of the serpent’ and

becomes strengthened thereby. By the

overcoming of demoniacal powers, he gains

possession of them”; 423 it is “the victory of the creative power of light over the ‘aeon of

the serpent.’” 424 The aeon through which we all must pass is “the primal serpent, Km-ȝ.t=f, ” whose epithet means “He who has

completed his time.” 425 He is represented by the Ouroboros, the snake with its tail in its

mouth, signifying that everything within the

circle of material things must pass away and return to the condition from which it came. 426

His doom has been pronounced; never can he

have his will on this earth, but he is baffled

and frustrated in whatever direction he

turns!427 The snake that swallows all must, in the turning of time, regurgitate all: the god

journeys the entire length of the serpent,

beginning with its tail, to emerge at its

mouth, thus reversing the course of death;428

Horus’s spear of light forces the serpent to

cough up all that it has swallowed (fig. 98;

see color plate 7).429

Figure 98. The candidate faces first the serpent and then the spear of Horus, representing the “sword and flame” which overcome the serpent. JSP V (BD 74,

75). © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

Thausing does not hesitate to compare the

serpent who blocks the progress of Re “in

the meadows of the blessed” 430 with Satan and the antichrist.431 Apophis has no beginning or end because he does not belong

to the world of limited existence but

occupies the middle ground between

“perishability and unperishability.” 432 In the last hour of the night, the dead enter the body

of a snake thirteen hundred cubits long,

passing from tail to mouth to be born in a

new form ( ḫpr)433 with the instruction,

“Sleep that you may awake, die that you may

live!” 434 The snake is the “World-embracer, who represents the boundary between the

World and the Non-world, Being and Non-

being,” the region in which all regeneration

necessarily takes place. 435

So the serpent performs a necessary

function; as the adversary in God’s plan, he

is a Mephistopheles: “die stehts das Böse

will, und stehts das Gute schafft.” 436 Try as he will to spoil everything, he only fulfills an

indispensable role in the carrying out of

God’s plan.

The Flaming Sword

The two things a snake cannot resist are

steel and fire, which are combined to banish Apophis from the garden place. It is

primarily in her capacity as “Great Lady of

the Flame” that the Lady drives out and

consumes the serpent, while the god bears

the sword against him: “May thy nature be

overthrown by the sword of the great god. …

Do not raise thy head! ”437 When the serpent’s limbs are bound, “the sword is

against him.” 438 The knives of Re and the two arms and the spear of Horus overcome

him;439 sword and flame remove his arms and legs. 440 Pharaoh praises the god who dispatches the serpent with sword (the

archaic flint sacrificial blade) and fire. 441

“They spill thy blood upon the fire, crushing

thy head with the flint knife; … the great god

removes thy legs”; 442 Re gives to the king his sword and flame to use against Apophis. 443

Fire and sword are not to be separated in the

ritual punishment of evil. 444 “The knife gains mastery over thee, enemy of Re, the fire

gains mastery over thee!” 445 To prevent the holy snake from coiling and striking, the

“butchers” are warned, “Let your swords be

sharp against the serpent, and blast the

wicked one with fire.” 446

From these and many other passages, it

appears that fire and sword are used to

punish and especially to expel the serpent

and to keep him from returning. One

commonly thinks of “cherubim and the

flaming sword” as posted to keep Adam and

Eve from returning to the garden—that may

be so, temporarily, but eventually they are to return; paradise must be regained (Article of

Faith 10). Indeed, the purpose of the

ordinances, especially of the Opening of the

Mouth, is to make the return to the garden

possible,447 and this time there will be no serpent there: the Egyptians quite logically

assume that the primary function of flame and sword is to keep Apophis from ever entering

the garden again. The “Sesy of the powerful

flame, … guardians of the gates of Him

Whose Name Is Hidden, ” are posted to keep the serpent out and to let Re in. 448 After the overthrow of Seth, Sia, “the Smart One,”

“the Swallower of serpents,” the discerning

intelligence who will not be fooled, is set to

guard the gate, armed with fire. 449 In the Amduat and the Book of Gates, the banishing

of Apophis is followed by a prayer to the

Ennead: “May your faces burn, may your

swords be sharp against the enemies of

Khepri. ”450 Since ḫrw is here the word for

“faces” and pʿw is a glowing fire in the

Book of the Dead, 451 it is permissible to wonder whether ḫrw-pʿw (faces of fire) with its Hebrew plural ending - îm might be the

source of the mysterious word cherubim of

the Bible. Or is it the Egyptian root ḫrp, “to

have control over,” as in the long Book of Breathings: “Twice welcome! say the ḫrp-ns.t- priests” (i.e., “those who are in charge of the throne,” they being the guardians of the

gate)? 452 Apophis is confronted by the keepers of the pylons, standing with swords

in their hands before a gate from which

flames shoot forth, and is repelled by both

sword and flame. 453 No one else can enter the place as yet either, excepting Re, since to

enter it is to breathe the air of eternal life,454

and man is not yet ready to live forever in

his sins. The Jewish doctors, at least, made

such a discrimination, telling us that when

Adam was driven out of the place of

delights, the watchers were placed there so

that none could enter unless they had been first purified by the hand of the cherubim.455

From the earliest times, then, fire and the

sword, or the flaming sword, prevent the

serpent from returning to the garden. The

serpent must remain in outer darkness,456

being himself the mystery of nonbeing, the

negation of all that is. 457 The Pistis Sophia gives the same explanation for the flaming

sword: The time will come, it says, when the

sword will be removed for Adam and he

may reach forth his hand and partake of the

fruit of the tree of life. But the serpent may

never do so; in the end the flaming sword

was for his benefit.

Notes

1. PT 317 §§507–10, in Joachim Spiegel, Das Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1971), 127–29.

2. Gertrud Thausing, Sein und Werden: Versuch einer Ganzheitsschau der Religion des Pharaonenreiches (Vienna: Stiglmayr, 1971), 128.

3. CT 173, in Adriaan de Buck, The Egyptian Coffin Texts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935–61), 3:54–

55.

4. CT 193, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:111; cf. CT

183, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:78.

5. CT 184, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:82–83; CT

167, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:21.

6. CT 162, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:394–95.

7. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Dead: The Papyrus of Ani, Scribe and Treasurer of the Temples of Egypt, About B.C. 1450 (New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1913), 3: pl. 16.

8. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:458; this is called the Chapter of Breathing Air.

9. Marie C. Weynants-Ronday, “Paradis égyptiens,” CdE 3

(1927): 74.

10. Bernard Chapira, “Légendes bibliques attribuées à Ka’b el-Ahbar,” Revue des études juives 69 (1919): 105 n. 4; cf. Psalm 1.

11. Henri Frankfort, The Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos (London: Egypt Exploration Society, 1933), 1:30.

12. Hermann Kees, “Die Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” ZÄS 78 (1942): 42.

13. For example, Erik Hornung, Das Amduat: Die Schrift des verborgenen Raumes (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1963–67), 1:32–33; 2:51.

14. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:165–66 and pl. 9.

15. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:34–36.

16. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:41–42; 2:56.

17. Karl Kerényi, “Voraussetzungen der Einweihung in Eleusis,” in Initiation, ed. Claas J. Bleeker (Leiden: Brill, 1965), 61.

18. Eberhard Otto, “Sprüche auf altägyptischen Särgen,”

ZDMG 102 (1952): 195–96.

19. CT 174, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:60.

20. CT 183, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:78.

21. CT 184, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:81.

22. CT 188, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:93.

23. CT 143, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:176.

24. Adriaan de Buck, “On the Meaning of the Name Ḥʿpj,”

in Orientalia Neerlandica: A Volume of Oriental Studies (Leiden: Sijthoff’s Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V., 1948), 13.

25. CT 179, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:72.

26. De Buck, “On the Meaning of the Name Ḥʿpj,” 1–22.

27. De Buck, “On the Meaning of the Name Ḥʿpj,” 19, emphasis added.

28. For more on Hapy, see below, commentary to lines 46–

47, pp. 340–42.

29. Ethel S. Drower, “The Ritual Meal,” Folk-Lore 48/3

(1937): 226–29; François J. Chabas, “Les libations chez les anciens égyptiens,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 13 (Paris: Leroux, 1909), 5:175–85; Hugh W. Nibley, “Sparsiones,” Classical Journal 40 (1945): 515–43, reprinted in The Ancient State: The Rulers and the Ruled, CWHN 10:148–94.

30. Cited in James H. Breasted, Ancient Records of Egypt (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1906–7), 1:263

no. 552.

31. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, trans. J. Gwyn Griffiths (Cambridge: University of Wales, 1970), 33.

32. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, 34.

33. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, 37–38.

34. Jean-Claude Goyon, Le Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279

(Cairo: IFAO, 1966), 69 and 69 n. 3.

35. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 72.

36. P. Louvre N. 3279 line 47, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 50–51, 53, and 53 n. 2.

37. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 60a–61b, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 59–62, emphasis added.

38. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd rev. ed.

(Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1957), 172.

39. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 117–18, in Constantin E.

Sander-Hansen, Die religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre (Copenhagen: Levin and

Munksgaard, 1937), 53.

40. PT 208 §124, in Kurt Sethe, Die altägyptische Pyramidentexte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1908–22), 1:72.

41. Philippe Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825 (B.M. 10051) : Rituel pour la conservation de la vie en Égypte (Brussels: Palais des Académies, 1965), 1:43.

42. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 12–13.

43. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 259–61, in Sander-Hansen, Religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre, 100–101.

44. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 197–98 §266.

45. Cf. “The Egyptian Ramesseum Drama,” in Theodor H.

Gaster, Thespis: Ritual, Myth and Drama in the Ancient Near East, new rev. ed. (New York: Harper and Row, 1966), 380–98, quotations on 380–81, 389, 390,

394.

46. Siegfried Morenz, “Zur Vergöttlichung in Ägypten,” ZÄS

84 (1959): 138.

47. Friedrich Preisigke, Vom göttlichem Fluidum nach ägyptischer Anschauung (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1920), 45.

48. Eberhard Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1960), 2:69 (scene 17).

49. Cited in Edouard H. Naville, “La destruction des hommes par les dieux: D’après une inscription

mythologique du tombeau de Séti I, à Thèbes,”

Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archaeology 4

(1875): 13.

50. BD 1, in Wilhelm Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1.

Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” ZÄS 76

(1940): 21.

51. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 66.

52. P. Leiden T 32 2/5–6 in Bruno H. Stricker, “De Egyptische mysteriën: Pap. Leiden T 32,” OMRO 31

(1950): 56.

53. Pierre Lacau, “Sur la reine Hatshepsēwe,” RHR 143

(1953): 1–2.

54. Walter Federn, “The ‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts: A New Approach,” JNES 19 (1960): 252; also CT

351, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 4:386–89.

55. Joachim Spiegel, “Das Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” ASAE 53 (1956): 353.

56. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 354.

57. PT 216 §§150–51, in Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der

Unaspyramide,” 361.

58. PT 263 §§340–41, in Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 382.

59. PT 302, 304 §§458–63, 468–71, in Spiegel,

“Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 395, 397.

60. Alexandre Piankoff, Le Livre du Jour et de la Nuit (Cairo: IFAO, 1942), 36–54.

61. Hermann Junker, Die Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien nach den Inschriften von Dendera, Edfu und Philae (Vienna: Hölder, 1910), 99–100.

62. Theban Tomb 78, east wall (north side) of hall, and Theban Tomb 161, south wall, in Siegfried Schott, Das schöne Fest vom Wüstentale: Festbräuche einer

Totenstadt (Wiesbaden: Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur in Mainz, 1952), 896–97 (132–33).

63. Spiegel, Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 13.

64. PT 6 §4; Wb 2:309; 1:331–32.

65. For more on Nut, see above, commentary to line 3, pp.

119–21.

66. Harry M. Stewart, “A Crossword Hymn to Mut,” JEA 57 (1971): 89–90.

67. Spiegel, Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 13.

68. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:35–36.

69. Winfried Barta, “Zur Frage des Zusammenhangs ramessidischer Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer in Karnak,” OLZ 66 (1971): 7.

70. Dieter Müller, “I Am Isis,” review of Ich bin Isis, by Jan Bergman, OLZ 67 (1972): 123.

71. For more on Maat, see above, commentary to lines 14–

15, pp. 186–89.

72. Cf. Müller, “I Am Isis,” 123.

73. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride (Of Isis and Osiris) 3.

74. Erik Hornung, “Politische Planung und Realität im alten Ägypten,” Saeculum 22 (1971): 52.

75. Ludwig Keimer, “Sur un bas-relief en calcaire représentant la déesse dans le sycomore et la déesse dans le dattier,” ASAE 29 (1929): 81–86.

76. Keimer, “Sur un bas-relief,” 83.

77. Eugène Lefébure, “Le paradis égyptien,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 36 (Paris: Leroux, 1915), 3:327–28.

78. Kurt Sethe, “Osiris und die Zeder von Byblos,” ZÄS 47

(1910): 71–72.

79. W. M. Flinders Petrie, “Osiris in the Tree and Pillar,”

Ancient Egypt (1928): 41–42.

80. Keimer, “Déesse dans le sycomore et la déesse dans le dattier,” 83.

81. Homer, Odyssey 6.161–69.

82. 1QapGenar XIX, 13–16, in Joseph A. Fitzmyer, The Genesis Apocryphon of Qumran Cave I: A

Commentary (Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1966), 50–52.

83. P. Bremner-Rhind 19/30–31; 20/6, 9, 12, etc., in Raymond O. Faulkner, The Papyrus Bremner-Rhind (British Museum No. 10188) (Brussels: FERE, 1933), 39.

84. P. Chester Beatty I 10/2–9, in Alan H. Gardiner, The Library of A. Chester Beatty: … The Chester Beatty Papyri, No. 1 (London: Oxford University Press, 1931), 21 and pl. 10–10a.

85. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 15–16, 21; Metternich Stela lines 168–251, in Constantin E. Sander-Hansen, Die Texte der Metternichstele (Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1956), 60–76.

86. Jan Bergman, Ich bin Isis: Studien zum memphitischen Hintergrund der griechischen Isisaretalogien

(Uppsala: Berlingska, 1968), 257–58, 261.

87. Bruno H. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,”

OMRO 23 (1942): 31.

88. W. Carleton Wood, “The Religion of Canaan from the Earliest Times to the Hebrew Conquest,” JBL 35 (1916): 24, 45, 67; Paul Haupt, “Crystal-Gazing in the Old Testament,” JBL 36 (1917): 89–92.

89. Wb 4:529.

90. Henry C. O. Lanchester, “The Sybilline Oracles: Introduction,” in APOT 2:368.

91. Chabas, “Libations chez les égyptiens,” 172–73.

92. Klaus Baer, “The Breathing Permit of Hôr: A Translation of the Apparent Source of the Book of Abraham,”

Dialogue 3/3 (1968): 122, emphasis deleted.

93. See Baer, “The Breathing Permit of Hôr,” 122 n. 63.

94. Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill: An Essay on Myth and the Frame of Time

(Boston: Gambit, 1969), 447–48.

95. Santillana and von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill, 412.

96. P. D’Orbiney 7/2, in Alan H. Gardiner, Late-Egyptian Stories (Brussels: FERE, 1932), 16.

97. Georges Posener, De la divinité du pharaon (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1961), 93.

98. Gerald A. Wainwright, The Sky Religion of Egypt: Its Antiquity and Effects (London: Cambridge University Press, 1938), 78–83, 91, 106.

99. Barta, “Zur Frage des Zusammenhang ramessidischer Rituelszenen,” 7; see Alan H. Gardiner, “Davies’s Copy of the Great Speos Artemidos Inscription,” JEA 32

(1946): 50; Wolfgang Helck, “Ramessidische Inschriften aus Karnak,” ZÄS 82 (1958): 122–23.

100. P. Louvre N. 3279 line 26, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 40–42.

101. Gertrud Thausing and Traudl Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch (Papyrus Reinisch) der Papyrussammlung der Österreichischen

Nationalbibliothek (Cairo: Österreichisches Kulturinstituts, 1969), 36 n. 13 and table 5; cf. BD 17.

102. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 21.

103. Sethe, “Osiris und die Zeder von Byblos,” 72–73.

104. P. Leiden T 32 4/12, in Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34 (1953): 21.

105. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 15.

106. George R. H. Wright, “Joseph’s Grave under the Tree by the Omphalos at Shechem,” Vetus Testamentum 22

(1972): 476–86.

107. Metternich Stela line 62, in Sander-Hansen, Die Texte der Metternichstele, 39.

108. Theodor Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris (Prague: Orientalisches Institut, 1940–41), 1:159.

109. P. Leiden T 32 1/24, in Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 56.

110. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:250–53.

111. Henri Gauthier, “Un pilier ( djed) au Musée du Caire,”

ASAE 35 (1935): 93–95.

112. Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 37 (1956): 63

n. 48; Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 23

(1942): 31; Wolfgang Helck, “Bemerkungen zum Ritual des Dramatischen Ramesseumspapyrus,” Or 23 (1954): 408–9.

113. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 21.

114. Haupt, “Crystal-Gazing in the Old Testament,” 85–86.

115. Gardiner, “Great Speos Artemidos Inscription,” 50; Gustave Jéquier, “Matériaux pour servir à

l’établissement d’un dictionnaire d’archéologie

égyptienne,” BIFAO 19 (1922): 221–26.

116. Kurt Sethe, “Zur ältesten Geschichte des ägyptischen Seeverkehrs mit Byblos und dem Libanongebiet,” ZÄS

45 (1908): 13; Sethe, “Osiris und die Zeder von Byblos,”

71–72.

117. BD 125, in Adriaan de Buck, Egyptian Readingbook: Exercises and Middle Egyptian Texts, 2nd ed. (Leiden: Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten, 1963), 120.

118. Konrad Hoffmann, Die theophoren Personennamen

des älteren Ägyptens (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1915), 2.

119. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:257.

120. BD 17.22, in Hermann Grapow, Das 17. Kapitel des ägyptischen Totenbuches und seine

religionsgeschichtliche Bedeutung (Berlin: Paul, 1912), 14; Alexandre Piankoff, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon (New York: Pantheon, 1955), 55.

121. Paul Barguet, “L’origine et la signification du contrepoids de collier-menat,” BIFAO 52 (1953): 111; cf.

Jean Leclant, “Fouilles et travaux en Égypte, 1950–

1951,” Or 20 (1951): 465.

122. Barguet, “Origine et la signification du contrepoids de collier-menat,” 111.

123. Barguet, “Origine et la signification du contrepoids de collier-menat,” 111; Julien Tondriau, “Tatouage, lierre et syncrétismes,” Aegyptus 30 (1950): 62–63.

124. P. Skrine, in Aylward M. Blackman, “The Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” JEA 4 (1917): 128.

125. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:64.

126. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 15–16.

127. 1QapGenar XIX, 13–16, in Fitzmyer, Genesis Apocryphon of Qumran Cave I, 50–53; Hugh W.

Nibley, “A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price,” IE, April 1970, 89–90, reprinted in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:367–69.

128. P. Oxyrhynchus 1 lines 6–9, in The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, ed. Bernard P. Grenfell and Arthur S. Hunt (London: Egypt Exploration Fund, 1898), 3; cf. Petrie,

“Osiris in the Tree and Pillar,” 44.

129. Petrie, “Osiris in the Tree and Pillar,” 44; cf.

Ecclesiastes 10:10, discussed by Haupt, “Crystal-Gazing in the Old Testament,” 85–86.

130. Sozomen, Ecclesiastical History 5.21, in Theodor Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae (Bonn: Marcus and Weber, 1922), 661.

131. PT 437 §808.

132. PT 483 §1019.

133. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:256–58.

134. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 258.

135. Wilhelm Spiegelberg, Der ägyptische Mythus vom Sonnenauge (der Papyrus der Tierfabeln—“Kufi”) nach dem Leidener demotische Papyrus I 384

(Strasbourg: Schultz, 1917), 23.

136. Sethe, “Osiris und die Zeder von Byblos,” 72.

137. F. F. Bruijning, “The Tree of the Herakleopolite Nome,”

Ancient Egypt (1921): 104–9.

138. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 123 and n. 2.

139. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:102–3.

140. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:64.

141. E. Douglas Van Buren, “The Esoteric Significance of Kassite Glyptic Art,” Or 23 (1954): 39.

142. Santillana and von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill, 439.

143. Santillana and von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill, 437–38; Samuel N. Kramer, The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and Character (Chicago: University of

Chicago Press, 1963), 277; Samuel N. Kramer,

“Gilgamesh and the Land of the Living,” Journal of Cuneiform Studies 1 (1947): 4.

144. Pierre Montet, “Le fruit défendu,” Kêmi 11 (1950): 87; Maurus Witzel, Auswahl sumerischer Dichtungen I (Rome: Pontificium Institutum Biblicum, 1938), 81–106.

145. Gaston Maspero, “Sur les jardins funéraires,” in Études de mythologie et d’archéologie égyptiennes, ed.

Gaston Maspero, BE 1 (Paris: Leroux, 1900), 4:241–42.

146. Maspero, “Sur les jardins funéraires,” 242–43.

147. Maspero, “Sur les jardins funéraires,” 244–45; Victor Loret, “Étude sur quelques arbres égyptiens,” RT 2

(1880): 23–26.

148. Hermann Junker, “Bedeutung und Symbolik der steinernen Becken in den Gräbern des Alten Reichs,”

ArOr 20 (1952): 185–89.

149. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:23; 2:43.

150. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 12.

151. Hermann Kees, Totenglauben und Jenseitsvorstellungen der alten Ägypter (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1926), 289.

152. T. Eric Peet, review of The Origin of Magic and Religion, by William J. Perry, JEA 10 (1924): 68.

153. Lefébure, “Paradis égyptien,” 320.

154. Friedrich Wilhelm von Bissing, “Osiris im Boot,” ZÄS

67 (1931): 15–19.

155. Schott, Das schöne Fest vom Wüstentale, 855–56

(91–92).

156. P. Skrine, in Blackman, “Funerary Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons,” 123–24.

157. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:258.

158. Erik Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971), 118–19; English trans., Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many, trans. John Baines (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1982), 129–30.

159. Sepher Hekhalot, in Adolph Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrash (1853–77; reprint, Jerusalem: Wahrmann, 1967), 5:172.

160. Jan Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 162.

161. P. Setna II 3/27–28, in Francis Ll. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis: The Sethon of

Herodotus and the Demotic Tales of Khamuas

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1900), 170–73; cf. 54.

162. CT 159, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:364.

163. Wolfgang Helck, Die Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II. in Karnak (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1968), 1:102 (discussion of pictures 85 and 85a).

164. Piankoff, Livre du Jour et de la Nuit, 5.

165. Paul Barguet, Le Livre des Morts des anciens égyptiens (Paris: Cerf, 1967), 99.

166. Walter Wreszinski, “Das Buch vom Durchwandeln der Ewigkeit nach einer Stele im Vatikan,” ZÄS 45 (1908): 120.

167. Gertrud Thausing, “Die Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” in Mélanges Maspero, ed. Pierre Jouguet (Cairo: IFAO, 1935–38), 40.

168. Siegfried Schott, Die Schrift der verborgenen Kammer in Königsgräbern der 18. Dynastie

(Gottingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1958), 351.

169. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:43.

170. E. A. E. Reymond, The Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1969), 98.

171. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 256.

172. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:40.

173. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:40–41.

174. Naville, “Destruction des hommes par les dieux,” 12–

13.

175. Shabako stone, lines 15c–16c, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 35.

176. Shabako stone, lines 57–59, in Sethe, “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein, 64–66.

177. Piankoff, Livre du Jour et de la Nuit, 5.

178. For references, see Hugh W. Nibley, “Tenting, Toll, and Taxing,” Western Political Quarterly 19 (1966): 625 nn.

171–72, reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN 10:94 nn.

171–72.

179. CT 187, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:90.

180. Spiegelberg, Der ägyptische Mythus vom Sonnenauge, 23; Victor Loret, “La turquoise chez les anciens égyptiens,” Kêmi 1 (1928): 108–9.

181. Thausing, “Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” 40.

182. Lefébure, “Paradis égyptien,” 330.

183. Naville, “Destruction des hommes par les dieux,” 12–

13.

184. See Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:78.

185. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 88, in Sander-Hansen, Religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre, 46.

186. Henry Madsen, “Die Totenfeier im Garten,” ZÄS 43

(1906): 51–54.

187. Gustave Lefebvre, “Textes du tombeau de Petosiris,”

ASAE 21 (1921): 234–35.

188. Gustave Lefebvre, Le tombeau de Petosiris (Cairo: IFAO, 1923–24), 1:82–83, 102, 140.

189. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 3: pl. 16.

190. Frankfort, Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, 1:30.

191. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 3: pl. 16.

192. Keimer, “Déesse dans le sycomore et la déesse dans le dattier,” 81–82.

193. CT 164, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:1.

194. CT 147, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:208–9.

195. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 100–

101.

196. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 101.

197. Ludwig Keimer, “L’arbre ṮR·T est-il réellement le saule égyptien,” BIFAO 31 (1931): 210–12.

198. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 79.

199. Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zur altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Der dramatische

Ramesseumpapyrus ein Spiel zur Thronbesteigung des Königs (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928), 142–43.

200. Cf. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:518; 3: pl. 24. Budge reads: “I will eat my food under the leaves of the trees whose beautiful arms (i.e., branches) I myself do know.”

201. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 241–

57.

202. Max Guilmot, “Les lettres aux morts dans l’Égypte ancienne,” RHR 170 (1966): 1.

203. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 57.

204. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 244.

205. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 65.

206. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:24.

207. Étienne Drioton, review of The Egyptian Coffin Texts, vol. 4, by Adriaan de Buck, BiOr 10 (1953): 167.

208. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 243–

44.

209. Chaeremon, in Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae, 184.

210. Hans Bonnet, Reallexikon der ägyptischen Religionsgeschichte, 2nd ed. (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971), 134.

211. Jaroslav Černý, Ancient Egyptian Religion (London: Hutchinson’s University Library, 1952), 50, 91.

212. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 8.

213. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 244–

45.

214. Cited in Eugène Lefébure, “Un chapitre de la chronique solaire,” ZÄS 21 (1883): 30 (designated as pl. 133, line 10).

215. Siegfried Morenz, Ägyptische Religion (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1960), 152.

216. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 34–35.

217. Gertrud Thausing, Der Auferstehungsgedanke in ägyptischen religiösen Texten (Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 1943), 16.

218. For more on transition, see above, commentary to line 2, pp. 107–9.

219. Raymond O. Faulkner, A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1962), 188–

89.

220. Wb 3:260–64.

221. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 241–

42.

222. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 244–

45, 252.

223. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 254.

224. Hugh W. Nibley, “What Is ‘The Book of Breathings’?”

BYU Studies 11/2 (1971): 167–70.

225. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 584.

226. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 97–98.

227. Heinrich Schäfer, “Altägyptische Bilder der auf- und untergehenden Sonne,” ZÄS 71 (1935): 15–38.

228. Alexandre Piankoff, “Les deux papyrus

‘mythologiques’ de Her-Ouben au Musée du Caire,”

ASAE 49 (1949): 133–34.

229. Max Guilmot, “La signification des métamorphoses du défunt en Égypte ancienne,” RHR 175 (1969): 10: “une alchimie de l’Être, … l’itinéraire des mutations de l’âme.”

230. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 363–

65.

231. Günther Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten (Jena: Diederichs, 1915), 185.

232. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 155; English trans., 161–62.

233. Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:24–25.

234. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 52–53; BD 149.

235. Hans O. Lange and Otto Neugebauer, Papyrus Carlsberg No. I: Ein hieratisch-demotischer

kosmologischer Text (Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1940), 16.

236. Guilmot, “Signification des métamorphoses du défunt,”

12–14.

237. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:336–39.

238. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:344–45.

239. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:346–47.

240. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:348–49.

241. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:39.

242. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:40.

243. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:41.

244. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:42.

245. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:43.

246. CT 132, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:152.

247. Cf. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 135.

248. CT 132, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:153.

249. CT 132, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:154.

250. CT 132, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:155.

251. CT 132, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:157.

252. Cf. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 298–99 §382.

253. CT 136, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:160–61.

254. CT 136, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:162.

255. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 257, citing Herodotus, Histories 3.22.4.

256. Robert Eisler, Iēsous basileus ou basileusas (Heidelberg: Winter, 1929–30), 2:104–6, 760.

257. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 257.

258. Piankoff, Livre du Jour et de la Nuit, 5.

259. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:70 (discussion of pictures 28–31).

260. Martti Haavio, Heilige Haine in Ingermanland (Helsinki: Academia Scientiarum Fennica, 1963), 77–95, 118–40.

261. Päivö Oksala, “Die göttliche Hochzeit und der Hain der Götter—Catulls Gedicht 64,” Temenos 4 (1969): 85–86, 88–89.

262. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 31–32.

263. PT 253 §275.

264. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 22, discussing BD 81, 30B, 64, 148.

265. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 99–

100.

266. P. Bremner-Rhind 19/30–31; 20/6, 9, 12, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 39.

267. Kurt Sethe, Die Sprüche für das Kennen der Seelen der heiligen Orte (Kap. 107–109, 111–116 des

ägyptischen Totenbuchs): Göttinger

Totenbuchstudien von 1919 (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1925), 12.

268. P. Bremner-Rhind 19/28, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 39.

269. P. Bremner-Rhind 19/7, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 37.

270. See, for example, P. Bremner-Rhind 2/2–5; 3/16–4/2, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 3–4, 6–7.

271. Eberhard Otto, Gott und Mensch nach den ägyptischen Tempelinschriften der griechisch-römischen Zeit: Eine Untersuchungen zur

Phraseologie der Tempelinschriften (Heidelberg: Winter, 1964), 64.

272. Otto, Gott und Mensch, 65–66, quotation on 65.

273. Otto, Gott und Mensch, 64.

274. Schott, Das schöne Fest vom Wüstentale, 895–97.

275. Theban Tomb 78, east wall (north side) of hall, and Theban Tomb 161, south wall, in Schott, Das schöne Fest vom Wüstentale, 896–97 (132–33).

276. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:70.

277. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:111.

278. P. Bremner-Rhind 3/13–15, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 6.

279. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:38 (discussion of picture 34).

280. Helck, Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:42 (discussion of picture 38), 52

(discussion of picture 46).

281. Aylward M. Blackman, “A Study of the Liturgy Celebrated in the Temple of the Aton, at El-Amarna,” in Recueil d’études égyptologiques: Dédiées à la

mémoire de Jean-François Champollion (Paris: Champion, 1922), 517, 520.

282. Schott, Das schöne Fest vom Wüstentale, 856 (92).

283. Ludwig Keimer, “Quelques remarques sur la huppe ( Upupa epops) dans l’Égypte ancienne,” BIFAO 30

(1931): 314–16 figs. 5–7.

284. Thaʿlabī, Qiṣaṣ al-Anbiyāʾ (Cairo: Mustāfā al Bābi al-Halabi wa-Awlāduhu, a.h. 1345), 216–18.

285. François Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” ASAE 51 (1951): 400.

286. Paul Barguet, review of The Pyramid of Unas: Texts Translated with Commentary, by Alexandre Piankoff, RHR 177 (1970): 69.

287. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, l00–

101.

288. Herodotus, Histories 2.64–65.1.

289. Elmar Edel, Das Akazienhaus und seine Rolle in den Begräbnisriten des alten Ägyptens (Berlin: Hessling, 1970), 36–37.

290. Andreas Alföldi, “Die Geschichte des Throntabernakels,” Nouvelle Clio 2 (1950): 554.

291. Alföldi, “Die Geschichte des Throntabernakels,” 556.

292. Oksala, “Die göttliche Hochzeit und der Hain der Götter,” 87–88.

293. CT 45, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:195–96.

294. Sethe, Dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus, 139, 142–

45.

295. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 100.

296. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 246.

297. Lefebvre, “Textes du tombeau de Petosiris,” ASAE 22

(1922): 147–48.

298. 2 Enoch 11, in A. Vaillant, Le Livre des Secrets D’Hénoch (Paris: Institut d’Études Slaves, 1952), 102–

3.

299. Bernhard Beer, Leben Abraham’s nach Auffassung der jüdischen Sage (Leipzig: Leiner, 1859), 174–75.

300. Montet, “Fruit défendu,” 85–87.

301. Micha J. bin Gorion, Die Sagen der Juden (Frankfurt: Rütten & Loening, 1913–27), 1:87.

302. 3 Baruch 4:15, in APOT 2:536; cf. OTP 1:669.

303. 3 Baruch 4:8–9, in APOT 2:535–36 and OTP 1:666–67.

304. John A. Bailey, “Initiation and the Primal Woman in Gilgamesh and Genesis 2–3,” JBL 89 (1970): 147.

305. Bailey, “Initiation and the Primal Woman,” 145–47.

306. Bailey, “Initiation and the Primal Woman,” 146.

307. Bailey, “Initiation and the Primal Woman,” 148.

308. Bailey, “Initiation and the Primal Woman,” 149.

309. Naville, “Destruction des hommes par les dieux,” 8, 12–

18; Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 142–44; Alexandre Piankoff, “Book of the Divine Cow,”

in Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, 27–29.

310. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 6; other sources in Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:6, 66.

311. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 35–36.

312. László Kákosy, “Ideas about the Fallen State of the World in Egyptian Religion: Decline of the Golden Age,”

Acta Orientalia 17 (1964): 205–10.

313. Otto, Gott und Mensch, 64.

314. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 37.

315. Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” 21.

316. Siegfried Schott, Die Reinigung Pharaos in einem memphitischen Tempel (Berlin P 13 242) (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1957), 52.

317. Winifred S. Blackman, “Sacred Trees in Modern Egypt,” JEA 11 (1925): 56–57.

318. Maspero, “Sur les jardins funéraires,” 246–48.

319. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 14.

320. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 17 n. 1.

321. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 14.

322. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 70.

323. P. Setna I 4/36–5/5, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 32–34, 120–23.

324. P. Setna I 5/3, 9, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 33–34, 122–25.

325. P. Setna I 5/10, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 34, 124–25.

326. P. Setna I 5/11–16, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 34–35, 126–27.

327. P. Setna I 5/16–18, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 35, 126–29.

328. P. Setna I 5/18–20, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 35–36, 128–29.

329. P. Setna I 5/21–27, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 36, 128–31.

330. P. Setna I 5/28–30, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 37, 130–33.

331. P. Setna I 5/31–32, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 37, 132–33.

332. P. Setna I 5/32, 35–36, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 37–38, 132–35.

333. P. Setna I 5/36, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests,

38, 134–35.

334. P. Setna I 5/32–37, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 37–38, 134–35.

335. P. Setna I 5/33, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 37–38, 132–33.

336. P. Setna I 5/33–35, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 37–38, 132–35.

337. Wb 1:18.

338. P. Setna I 5/37–38, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 134–35.

339. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 3–5.

340. See, for example, Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 3: pl. 10.

341. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:257.

342. Cited in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 45.

343. Montet, “Fruit défendu,” 87.

344. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 151; English trans., 158.

345. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 153; English trans., 159; and Book of Gates 2.54–59, in Jan Zandee, “The Book of Gates,” in Liber amicorum: Studies in Honour of Professor Dr. C. J. Bleeker (Leiden: Brill, 1969), 300–301.

346. Erik Hornung, review of The Origins of Osiris, by J. Gwyn Griffiths, OLZ 65 (1970): 19.

347. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 93, 140–41.

348. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:93; PT 378

§§663–66.

349. Metternich Stela lines 81–82, in Sander-Hansen, Texte der Metternichstele, 44–45.

350. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 34.

351. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 35.

352. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 36.

353. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 252.

354. BD 115 and 17, respectively, in Kees, “Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” 44; Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 1:166, 197–98; 2:343 and n.

3.

355. Leonard H. Lesko, The Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), 6.

356. P. Bremner-Rhind 25–33, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 55–93.

357. Sethe, Sprüche für das Kennen der Seelen der heiligen Orte, 11–12; BD 115.

358. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 73.

359. Sethe, Dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus, 124, 126.

360. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 43 n. 1; László Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” ZÄS

97 (1971): 105.

361. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:158–59.

362. Lefébure, “Un chapitre de la chronique solaire,” 29–30.

363. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 19.

364. P. Bremner-Rhind 27/15–20, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 63–64.

365. Metternich Stela lines 53–55, in Sander-Hansen, Texte der Metternichstele, 36–37, 41.

366. Metternich Stela lines 76–82, in Sander-Hansen, Texte der Metternichstele, 44–45.

367. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:93; see PT

378 §§663–66.

368. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:76

(scene 43).

369. P. Chester Beatty I 10/2–9, in Gardiner, Chester Beatty Papyri, No. 1, 20–21 and pl. 10–10a.

370. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 2.

371. Schott, Reinigung Pharaos, 60.

372. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 62–63.

373. Metternich Stela lines 199–204, 237, in Sander-Hansen, Texte der Metternichstele, 63–64, 67.

374. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata 5.7, in PG 9:68–69.

375. CT 150, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:254.

376. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 158; English trans., 164.

377. Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” 104–5.

378. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:119–20.

379. Cf. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 22. [The caduceus, a single serpent on a staff, was the symbol of Asculapius, who healed the dead, and was related to the sign of the two interlaced serpents on the staff of Hermes, the guide of the dead; in the latter case, one serpent signifies death, the other life, and they are intertwined in life-giving copulation—eds.]

380. See M.-L. Erlenmeyer and H. Erlenmeyer, “Über Schlangen-Darstellungen in der frühen Bildkunst des alten Orients,” AfO 23 (1970): 57–60.

381. László Kákosy, review of Le papyrus magique illustré de Brooklyn, by Serge Sauneron, BiOr 29 (1972): 29.

382. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 3: pl. 10.

383. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 138–39.

384. Piankoff, “Deux papyrus ‘mythologiques’ de Her-Ouben au Musée du Caire,” 134.

385. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/16, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 79.

386. Metternich Stela lines 59–61, 66, in Sander-Hansen, Texte der Metternichstele, 38–39.

387. Schott, Reinigung Pharaos, 67.

388. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 88–90, in Sander-Hansen, Religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre, 46.

389. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 91–96, in Sander-Hansen,

Religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre, 47–48.

390. Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 98–99, in Sander-Hansen, Religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre, 49.

391. P. Bremner-Rhind 23/17–18; 24/1, 5–8; 25/1, in E. A.

Wallis Budge, “On the Hieratic Papyrus of Nesi-Amsu, a Scribe in the Temple of Amen-Rā at Thebes, about B.C.

305,” Archaeologia 52 (1890): 514–23.

392. Cf. Book of Gates 1.122–25, in Zandee, “Book of Gates,” 288.

393. Book of Gates 1.182–211, in Zandee, “Book of Gates,”

291–93; cf. Book of Gates 1.112, in Zandee, “Book of Gates,” 287.

394. Cf. Book of Gates 1.239–40, in Zandee, “Book of Gates,” 294–95.

395. Cf. Book of Gates 2.162, in Zandee, “Book of Gates,”

308.

396. Cf. Book of Gates 3.14–16, in Zandee, “Book of Gates,” 314.

397. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/3, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 76.

398. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/4, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 77.

399. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/10–11, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 78.

400. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/14, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 79.

401. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/15, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 79.

402. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/16, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 79.

403. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/1–2, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 76.

404. P. Bremner-Rhind 27/12–13, 29/13, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 63, 73.

405. P. Bremner-Rhind 29/23, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 75.

406. P. Bremner-Rhind 29/23–26, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 75–76.

407. P. Bremner-Rhind 27/13, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 63.

408. P. Bremner-Rhind 29/11, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 73.

409. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 46.

410. Jan Zandee, Death as an Enemy: According to Ancient Egyptian Conceptions, trans. Mrs. W. F.

Klasens (Leiden: Brill, 1960), 100.

411. Cited in Alexandre Piankoff, “Le Livre des Quererts,”

BIFAO 42 (1944): 5 and pl. 11.

412. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:55–57.

413. Erik Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen (Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1968), 17–18.

414. P. Bremner-Rhind 27/7–12, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 62.

415. For more on the reversal of the blows of death, see above, commentary to lines 36–37.

416. P. Bremner-Rhind 27/10–13, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 62–63.

417. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 62–63.

418. Kurt Sethe, Übersetzung und Kommentar zu den altägyptischen Pyramidentexten (Hamburg: Augustin, 1962), 3 : 224; Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:19; Hermann Kees, Der Götterglaube im alten Ägypten (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1941), 171 n. 5: “geheimnisvoll, abnorm.”

419. Herbert W. Fairman, “The Myth of Horus at Edfu—I,”

JEA 21 (1935): 32.

420. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:97–98.

421. P. Louvre N. 3292 I/13–14, in George Nagel, “Un papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire (Louvre 3292 [inv.]),” BIFAO 29 (1929): 47.

422. PT 299 §444, in Sethe, Übersetzung und Kommentar zu den altägyptischen Pyramidentexten, 2:223–26, 360–61.

423. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 49 n. 5.

424. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 46 n. 1.

425. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 289.

426. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 158; English trans., 164.

427. P. Bremner-Rhind 29/9–10, in Faulkner, Papyrus

Bremner-Rhind, 73.

428. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:188–89.

429. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 62.

430. BD 136.

431. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 41.

432. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 150–51; English trans., 158–59.

433. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:197.

434. PT 482 §1006 and PT 670 §1975b.

435. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 154; English trans.

164.

436. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust 1336. [The Greek term Mephistopheles means, as Goethe noted, “who

desires to do evil, but does good instead” —eds.]

437. Metternich Stela lines 1–4, in Sander-Hansen, Texte der Metternichstele, 16–18.

438. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:121.

439. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/89, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 77–78.

440. P. Bremner-Rhind 31/25, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 85.

441. P. Bremner-Rhind 22/13, 21–22; 22/24–23:1, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 44–45.

442. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/1–2, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 76.

443. P. Bremner-Rhind 22/13, 21–22; 22/24–23/1, in

Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 44–45.

444. P. Bremner-Rhind 31/1–2, 11–15, 24–26, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 81, 83–86; Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen, 18.

445. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/8, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 77.

446. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:97–98.

447. Psalm of Thomas 18:4–15 , in C. R. C. Allberry, A Manichaean Psalm-Book (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1938), 2:225.

448. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” 5 pl. XI.

449. Book of Night, 58, 70, in Coffin of Anchnesneferibre 98–99, in Sander-Hansen, Religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre, 49; cf. Book of Gates 1.128–30, in Zandee “Book of Gates,” 288.

450. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:115, and Hornung, Altägyptischen Höllenvorstellungen, 121–22.

451. Wb 1:503.

452. P. Leiden T 32 1/22, in Stricker, “Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 56.

453. P. Bremner-Rhind 30/11–15, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 77.

454. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 48–49.

455. Bin Gorion, Sagen der Juden, 1:118.

456. Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” 104–5.

457. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 172; English trans.,

178.

Commentary, Part 5

The Long Road Back

Awareness of the Fall: The “Way of

Life” for the Living and the Dead

We now come to the most significant part

of what Joachim Spiegel calls “a drama of

overpowering sublimity,” which was thought

to culminate in “a literal ascent to heaven.” 1

The basic elements of religion are, as

Gertrud Thausing points out, man’s

awareness of his lost and fallen state—the

Urtragik of his existence—and his hopes of escaping from it.2 Equal awareness of his present misery and potential for glory meets

him at every turn in all the nobler products of

his mind. The problem is how to get from the

one state to the other; that is the main

concern of the mysteries. The dark coffin chamber and the bright celestial room are the

beginning and ending of the story, but the

fearful passage itself, the most important

learning and doing, is found in the

Mittelkammer on the way from the one to the other.3 It is becoming increasingly clear that many texts formerly regarded as purely

funerary were designed to give the living a

head start on the road to glory while the

candidate was still in the bloom of life. This

idea has been passionately rejected by all

the most vocal critics of the Book of

Abraham. They prefer to take the position of

Siegfried Morenz, who, after conceding very

real Egyptian influence on both the Jewish

and Christian religions, stubbornly refuses to

budge an inch on this one point, though it is

the most obvious of all. 4 “Especially Morenz,” wrote Walter Federn, “is violently

opposed to it. However,” he continues, “it

has been generally recognized in recent years that … a good part of the [Coffin] texts

… originally were of a nonfunerary

character … destined for the living.” 5 At least as early as the Eighteenth Dynasty,

Eberhard Otto observes, “the possibility of

higher immortal existence was not limited to

the funerary salvation ( Verklärung) , ” for it was believed possible to aspire to glory by

another path, heretofore unsuspected by

scholars, entailing “an entirely new

relationship between man and the realm

( Bezirk) of godhood.” 6 Thus there appears

“by the side of the funerary activity a new

hope for eternal life, undarkened by funereal

gloom.” 7 It was implemented by certain ordinances through which one could become

sanctified even in this life. How old the idea

is we do not know, for the Egyptians, ever of

a speculative turn, confused things at an

early date, as “they consciously copied the

old texts … without understanding them in their proper context. ”8 Thus the imposing but baffling cenotaph of Seti I contains much

“witless and senseless” material, proving to

Henri Frankfort “how artificial the revival

was” at that time—a “blind alley.” 9

The essence of the “second religiosity”

was the Way of Life, the passage from

darkness to light.10 The terminology is astonishingly like that of early Christians and

Jews. 11 When Baruch tells us that the righteous “shall be made like unto the angels,

and be made equal to the stars, and they shall

be changed into every form they desire, ”12 or when an early apocalypse of Adam tells how

the patriarch was instructed by an angel:

“take the way … of life. I have come to

deliver thee from this world of darkness and

to place thee on the throne of joy,” etc., 13 or when Gregor of Nyssen writes, “When the

soul is on its way in the search for God, it

progresses ceaselessly and is constantly being transformed into new forms ever more

glorious, and so passes from glory to

glory,” 14 they are speaking in terms quite as authentically Egyptian as the Hebrew

Wisdom literature or Christian trinitarian

texts, which Morenz readily recognizes as

Egyptian,15 while hotly denying any possible connection of the initiation motifs.

This is where Facsimiles 1 and 3 of the

Book of Abraham, depicting the king (or his

substitute) in his fallen and his risen state

respectively, come in. Facsimile 1 furnished

the frontispiece to the Joseph Smith Book of

Breathings (fig. 99; see color plate 1), on the

one hand, and on the other teems with the

sacrificial Abraham motifs. Need we recall

that Bruno Stricker, in winding up his Book

of Breathings studies, cites Abraham’s

sacrifice of Isaac (which we have shown to

be a repetition of his own experience on the

altar)16 as illustrative of the main idea behind the rites of the Breathings texts?17

That picture of the man on the lion couch,

found at important shrines in Egypt,

“represents how the king is resuscitated from

his torpor. … This scene,” says Frankfort,

“represents therefore the greatest mystery of

the Egyptian beliefs, and this may explain why the accompanying texts are protected

from the profane by particularly enigmatic

writing.” 18 As in the Forty-Day literature of the early Christians, the greatest mysteries

are the ones least exposed and discussed.19

The puzzling structure of which Frankfort is

speaking—the cenotaph of Seti I, more a

temple than a tomb20—is proclaimed by the inscriptions all through it to be a place of

passage; here at “the place where death was

vanquished and life renewed,” 21 one passes from “the Place of Destruction”22 to the

height of the heavens,23 bringing “light to those who are in darkness” on the way in the

manner of the king in the Amduat and of

Christ in the descensus. 24

Figure 99. The lion-couch scene lies at the very heart of the Egyptian mysteries set forth in the Book of Breathings. Facsimile I from the Book of Abraham

was the frontispiece to the Joseph Smith Book of

Breathings (JSP XI and X). Reconstructed drawing,

after JSP I. © Intellectual Reserve Inc.

While the concepts can be traced to the

earliest times, the Pyramid Texts, according to Winfried Barta, are concerned with getting

a dead king secretly over the gulf to the other

side, safely resurrected and glorified, while

the Amduat version of the Eighteenth

Dynasty is more concerned with what the

king is to do after all that is accomplished—

it tells “how life goes on the other side,” 25

describing the “one eternal round” typified

by the sun in its course. But instead of an

eternal return to the starting point, the course

is depicted as an ever-mounting spiral—

eternal progression. 26

The journey begins with the miracle of

Stirb und Werde, the very essence of all the mysteries, according to Thausing, 27 with the stirring of the supine figure on the lion

couch, his legs already striding forward on

the way. But he must be properly equipped

for the perilous journey that lies ahead.

Lines 29 to 54 of our text all deal with

preparation for a journey. The candidate is assured that Anubis will guard him (line 29),

that he will meet no rebuff at any of the

checking points (line 30), that Thoth is

handing him a document guaranteeing his

survival (lines 30–31), that he is going with

the authority of Re himself (lines 32–36),

that he is physically fit for the walk and can

meet any situation (line 37). This suggests

the awakening passage that is inserted here

(lines 38–41). The initiate is declared

certified, stamped, and sealed (lines 41–42)

and thus is identified with Re and Shu (the

moving light, line 43). All places are

declared open to him (lines 45–46), food is

provided as he needs it (lines 46–47), divine

guides offer their services (lines 48–49), a

special bodyguard is enlisted (line 50),

Sekhmet forestalls any adverse operations

(line 52), and Horus takes over in the

capacity of personal bodyguard, reserve unit,

and advanced reconnaissance (lines 53–54).

Initiation as a Journey

“The way of initiation and the way of the

next world are completely parallel in all

ancient cultures.” 28 Every soul on earth is in the position of the primal man, passing from

one existence to another. 29

The initiate, like the sun, begins his

journey at the winter solstice, in the place of

greatest darkness. Stricker compares his

condition to that of Adam, terrified by the

darkness and danger surrounding him. 30 The main thing is that the initiate does find

himself in the lower world for the time

being. But fortunately he is not obliged to

stay there; the whole idea is to keep moving,

and the passage through the temple is

described in terms of striding, hastening,

even running. 31 The common terminus technicus, according to Jan Zandee, is swȝ,

meaning “walking briskly and safely through dangerous places of the underworld. ”32 “O

eye of Horus, get me out of here with you!”

is the plea of the candidate. 33

The classic passage through the

underworld, so strongly reminiscent of the

early Christian accounts of the descensus, is

that described in the Amduat. It begins in the

first hour neither in the upper world nor in

the lower world, but on the horizon between

them, designated as the desert ( zmy.t) or the first cavern. 34 The first six divinities of the second hour are all ladies of the desert

valley, their names invoking the attributes of

serpent, shepherd, fighting, and fire. 35 As we penetrate deeper into the desert, twelve

snakes “illuminate” the darkness ahead with

their “fire” or poison, for we are entering a

world of serpents where the serpent Uraeus

is the only defense. 36 By the fourth hour we are completely “on the Way of Sand,”

swarming with snakes, where the sun-ship itself turns into a snake in order to get

through (see pp. 398–99, fig. 129). 37 By the fifth hour only Isis can follow through the

fiery way into the sandy land of Sokar. 38 In the seventh hour everything reaches its

lowest point and grinds to a halt on the great

sand bank; there is no water for the ship to

move in, and the great serpent Apophis lies

across the route, completely barring

passage. 39 Yet it is at this point that things are set in motion again, including the stars

themselves.40 Then, in the eighth hour life begins to stir. “A sound is heard from the

cavern like the humming of many bees, when

their souls call upon Re,” in response to his

call to them;41 “again they sit in their garments on the sand and the God calls to

them; there is a sound from the cave like the

voices of people mourning” ;42 noises of progressive revival are heard at successive

gates—confused buzzing sounds of things just stirring to life. 43

It will be recalled that both Adam and

Noah, upon setting foot in this, our world,

found themselves in a true desert ( midbār) and had to work desperately, cultivating the

ground merely to survive (Genesis 3:17–19;

9:20). To survive in such hostile

surroundings and to travel through such

strange lands, one must have both guidance

and protection. This is the theme of this part

of the Book of Breathings, as of the

Amduat. 44 It will be recalled that our candidate began his progress by entering the

Hall of the Two Maats. In the Amduat he is

given an interpreter (Re himself), a viaticum

to supply his wants on the way (this is “the

Lord of Breathing … who supplies

livelihood”), and “thy Two Maats to lead

thee in the Way of Darkness.” 45 The older Book of Two Ways deals with that part of the

sun’s journey which is through the dark underworld toward the sunrise, 46 including, as in the Amduat, the boat trip over the dark

waters. 47 It is safe to say that the main theme of the last collections of Egyptian funerary

literature—understood as guides to the

beyond and including “such collections as

the Book of Gates, the Book of Caves, …

Amduat, ” the Book of Two Ways, and finally the Book of Breathings48—is man’s journey of hope through a dark and dreary world. Let

us go back and begin, as our text does, with

preparation for the journey.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 29–

33

29. … Anubis guards thee; he is ( lit.

makes) thy security.

30 . There is no turning thee away from the gates of the duat. Thoth, the Most High (twice great [ different spelling in JSP]),

Lord of Hermopolis, comes up to thee, having written [ JSP: has written] for thee

31 . writings [ JSP: a book] of breathings with his own fingers, so that thy ba may go on breathing forever and thou renew

thy form

32 (2/10). as upon the earth among the

living, thou being deified along with the

bas of the gods. Thy heart is the heart

of Re;

33. thy members are the members of the

great god (himself).

Commentary: Preparing for the

Journey

In this section all legal and other

hindrances to the undertaking of the journey

for which the preceding rites have been the

preparation are removed. This is not the

removal of barriers and obstacles along the

way—that comes in later sections—but of all valid objections to making the journey.

Line 29: “Anubis guards thee; he is (guarantees, lit. makes) thy security

(protection)”

The treatment of the body is under the

supervision of Anubis from the moment it

becomes the object of special care. As Jean-

Claude Goyon observes, protection is the

main theme and purpose of the Books of

Breathings49—protection during the times of transition when the soul, like a crab at the

moment of exchanging its smaller shell for a

larger one, is hopelessly naked and

defenseless. “Come ye gods, provide

protection for him within the womb, knowing

that he is your lord and god while still in the

egg! ”50 At the most dangerous of all moments, when the soul is in the “egg,” or

embryo, of a new life, the serpent-god

himself must protect the oval in which the miracle takes place (fig. 100);51 only the flame of the serpent can drive off the

destroying serpents. 52 As is well known, the business of Anubis is to see to the proper

preparation of the mummy. This makes him

the Great Protector, preserving the

endangered body intact against the day of

resurrection. This follows the order of

nature: “As long as the structural integrity of

a cryptobiote remains intact the organism is

capable of resuming the active state that is

generally deemed to be characteristic of

life”; the return to a living state with its

normal “degradative reactions” requires

three things: water, oxygen, and heat. 53 It is interesting that the primary purpose of the

Book of Breathings is to supply the dead

with water, air, and light, the last being

actually the assurance of a “rewarming” of

the body when the time comes, according to

Goyon;54 the idea seems to have carried over from Egypt to Palestine at a very early

time.55 The ingenuity of the Egyptians in preserving the structural integrity of the

human body against the possible day of

resurrection—that is, the whole art of

mummification—may well be not an

indication of naive faith, it has been

suggested, but the opposite, reflecting ever-

growing doubts as to the possibility of a real

resurrection. 56

Figure 100. Life in the womb is for some reason

represented in company of a serpent. Note the

incompleted eye. Redrawn from the Book of

Caverns, cenotaph of Seti I, ca. 1290 B.C. After

Frankfort, Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, 2: pl. 32.

Line 30: “There is no turning thee away from (thou shalt not be opposed at) the gates

of the duat”

Thanks still to Anubis, the episkopos who

holds the key to the gates of the underworld

( duat) is therefore in a position to let the candidate pass. 57 As we have shown elsewhere, this passage could quite properly

be translated “The Gates of Hell shall not

prevail against thee! ”58

Figure 101. Thoth presents the initiate with the book.

The inscription says that this chapter is “to cause one to remember.” P. Turin 1791 (BD 90), ca. 150 B.C.

Courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

Lines 30–31: “Thoth, the Most High (twice great), Lord of Hermopolis, comes up to

thee, having written (has written) for thee

writings (a book) of breathings with his own

fingers”

An earlier statement appears in Book of

the Dead chapter 182. “Twice [or very]

great” is a common epithet of Thoth. Thoth’s

headquarters is Ḫmnw, the “City of Eight”

(Coptic Šmoun, today el-Ashmunein), the

number eight being the expression of

creation;59 it was also called Hermopolis because Thoth was the Egyptian Hermes.

Also in chapter 182, Thoth comes bringing

breath and protection to the dead,

purification of everything done on earth.60

This makes him the equivalent of the lady

Maat—and indeed, at this point of our Breathings text, his name is written with

nothing but a single maat-feather. No higher authority could be claimed for any book than

is here claimed for the Book of Breathings,

brought personally by Thoth from

headquarters and written “with his own

fingers” (fig. 101; cf. p. 29, fig. 4). 61

As we have seen, the opening line of the

Book of Breathings proclaims that Isis

“made” this book in behalf of her brother

Osiris, but its contents are supplied her by

Thoth. He in turn is only the purveyor,

however, not the initiator. His office is

always that of secretary, scribe, recorder,

adviser, confidential assistant, whose calling

it is to record, preserve, and transmit

everything of importance, not to produce it

or create it. 62 He is identified with the moon, which does not produce but merely transmits

the light of Re. 63 The Book of Breathings

thus no more originates with Isis and Thoth than it does with the local scribe who

records that he wrote it “with his own

fingers.”

As the representative of the cosmic order

who conducts one through the ordinances of

the eternities, Thoth is the unfailing guide of

the Book of the Dead. 64 S. Mayassis has brought together numerous references to

Thoth as the “initiateur originel et

primordial” ;65 as being in charge of the temple personnel66 and temple vestments; as author of the “initiatory books,” 67 the hidden books of Thoth being in the temple library at

Hermopolis.68 The glory of Thoth is intelligence, and his work is to assist the

initiate in his aspirations to divinity. 69 The sacred books of initiation are the fabulous

hermetic literature, which Hermes

Trismegistos (it is interesting that Thoth, in

this connection, is called, in our Breathings

text, “twice great” since Trismegistos means

“thrice great”) says were handed down from

Thoth to Kamaphes (the sun-bull), thence to

Horus and Isis, and thence to Osiris, Osiris

being the first mortal to go through the

temple and learn the “great secret,” his

family then following his example. 70

Line 31: “so that thy ba may go on breathing forever”

The sḏm=f suggests a purpose or result

clause here since the same word for

“breathing” occurs in the clause immediately

preceding. The peculiar nature of the ba 71

makes identity of holy beings possible at all

times.

Lines 31–33: “that … thou renew thy form as (when) upon the earth among the living,

thou being deified (sanctified, divine) along

with the ba s of the gods. Thy heart is the heart of Re; thy members are the members of

the great god.”

Here the subject is assured that it is

himself and no other who lives on (line 32)

and that his ba is the ba of a god and his heart is the heart of a god. As in chapter 125, on the day of creation, he announces, “I

am the nose of the Lord of Breathing,” 72 so, in chapter 182, by bringing breath to Osiris,

he establishes the world order. 73

These ideas are conveyed in our text,

where Thoth assures the proper order of the

rites by writing down and handing a text to

the candidate—this very Book of Breathings.

Hermopolis rivaled Heliopolis itself in age

and importance, 74 being, like it, proclaimed as the primal center of creation, with its

primordial hill to which Re himself repaired

on New Year’s Day, returning to the place

where he was born. 75 Here were first established on earth those holy ordinances

and teachings of which Thoth was the

official guardian and purveyor to mankind; hence it is necessary for him to bring his

snsn book from there. In the Prayer of

Kheruef, which contains “nearly all that we

know about Thoth,” 76 he is addressed as

“Lord of the Divine Words, keeper of the

secret knowledge that is in heaven and earth;

great god of the beginning … who

established speech and writing causing the

temples to flourish.” 77 At the coronation, Thoth and the new king must sign the

registration book together so that the

business might be recorded simultaneously

above and below, sealed both in heaven and

on earth. 78

The Book of Breathings is the final

epitome of the writings of Thoth, for all the

hermetic books of the mysteries were written

by him. 79 In the Setne story, the Book of Thoth, “written with his own hand,” 80

contains all knowledge, 81 protecting the

holder from all harm as it once protected Thoth himself. 82 Thoth is thus an Enoch figure, keeper of the heavenly and earthly

books of remembrance and teacher of

heavenly wisdom to men. When the priest in

the temple drama announces, “I am Thoth. …

I have come out of heaven to earth with the

secrets of the horizon dweller,” he is

pronouncing a “revelation formula” or

“proclamation of identification,” as Jan

Bergman puts it, which serves notice that the

ordinances are of a celestial order, brought

to earth through the mediacy of the proper

authority. 83 The writing known as the Eloquent Peasant appeals to Thoth (1) as

Lord of Truth, as pen, scroll, palette; (2) as

everything good; and (3) as the guarantor of

the bona fides, his whole body with all its

members being the body of a god. 84

An important agent of unification is the

heart, thanks to its peculiar power to depart

from a person while still remaining part of him: “The heart,” writes Louis Žabkar, “can,

as ‘another self,’ depart from him” and this

“‘externalization’ of the heart’s activities has

reached the limits of a true ‘hypostatization’”

even though “the heart is said to be a man’s

ka” —strictly his own, 85 the heart being a ka in its role of that protecting genie of the

individual which never leaves the dead. 86

Hence during the dangerous journey, the

heart both provides and needs guidance,

according to the Sensaos Breathings text: “O

Lord of Light within the temple, turn thy face

to me! … Guide my heart to (or for) me in

the moment of despair ( nbty)!” 87 For the Egyptian, “the heart is the central organ, the

source of all power for both life and

afterlife.” 88

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 34–

37

34. Hail, Osiris, God’s Father, Prophet of Amon-Re King of the Gods, Prophet of

Min-Amon,

35. Wsỉr-Wr, Justified [ JSP: Osiris Hor Justified], Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy,

Justified! Amon is at thy side constantly

(every day [ JSP adds: in the Temple ( or House) of Re]) engaged in ( ḥr, concerned with)

36. renewing thee ( or thy renewing) in life.

[ JSP: Thou repeatest life.] Wepwawet reports (opens, announces) to thee the right road. Thou seest with thine eye, thou

hearest with thy two ears, thou speakest

37 (2/15). with thy mouth, thou walkest

with thy two legs. Thy ba is deified in

the duat, being about to ( r, so as to) make whatever transformation ( ḫprw) it desires.

Commentary: The Way Is Open,

Wepwawet

Here the Egyptian text begins a new section, starting with a fresh line and

opening with a salutation to the candidate.

The preceding section assured authorization

for his journey; now, at last, the subject is

actually in motion and underway.

Lines 34–36: “Hail Osiris, God’s Father, Prophet of Amon-Re King of the Gods,

Prophet of Min-Amon, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified,

Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified! Amon is at thy side constantly (every day) engaged in

renewing thee ( or thy renewing) in life”

The same expression, “Amon is at thy

side,” occurred in lines 20–21 above,

representing the creation of man’s body.

After “to renew thee,” Papyrus Louvre N.

3291 adds “among the living.” The situations

here and at the creation are not the same, but

the motif is the same: “the way of the ba” is the road that leads from the coffin back to the

realms above. 89 Mayassis thinks of this as the initiate’s toiling in a lone and gloomy

world toward a distant point of light—the

twelfth hour of the Amduat. 90 As one needs knowledge for the journey, so one acquires

knowledge as the voyage progresses: “I open

the barriers of my ba and send it on to the god of the duat. Atum brings out my ba to Geb that it might learn (know) the ways of

the earth. He has opened the earth and

removed the barriers and given it authority

( sḫm) among the gods.” 91 “I proceed against all obstacles, walking by the instructions of

every god … at the proper time.” 92

Figure 102. Two faithful guides: Thoth with his book shows the way; Wepwawet on his standard opens the

way for the supreme ruler. P. Louvre N. 3092 (BD

146).

When the spirit begins its journey, Wepwawet, “the divine jackal, offers

himself before his [the dead’s] eyes [as a

guide] and, walking before him, leads him to

the land of the mummies, the oasis, isle of

the blessed” (fig. 102).93 In our text he offers his services in company with others: Amon

is ready at hand to protect, Thoth bustles up

with a ticket all in order, and Wepwawet

runs eagerly ahead to get things going.

Wepwawet is the faithful hunting dog who, in

prehistoric times, ran ahead of His Sacred

Majesty whenever he took to the field.94 It was Wepwawet who helped Osiris conquer

Egypt in the beginning, charging ahead of

him with his deadly arrows. 95 Hence in combat he is the avenger of Horus, and none

other than Pharaoh himself, “the earthly

embodiment of Horus.” 96 Identified with Horus, Wepwawet figures prominently in

myths associated with the birth and rebirth of

Pharaoh, being “one of the fundamental forms in which the king and kingship make

their appearance, especially on the day of the

royal succession.” 97 Also in the royal funeral, the king issued forth, “transformed

into Upwawet,” from the pool of life. 98 This shows his identity with Osiris also, for it

was Osiris who replaced Wepwawet in the

Abydos cult at a very early time, according

to Charles Autran.99 “Thou hast come forth from the pool of life, being washed in the

pool of Ḳebḥu, and becoming Upwawet. Thy

son Horus conducts thee.” 100 Qbḥw is the waters of heaven, and in heaven also we find

Wepwawet leading the procession of the

Ennead, opening up a way through the midst

of the enemy. 101 Throughout historic times the Wepwawet standard of a hunting dog

mounted on a pole announces the approach

of the king in the field of battle, in the hunt,

and in religious processions alike, and it

was raised on the palace roof to proclaim the birth of a royal heir, “and thereby the

birth of the kingship itself,” and to signify the

consummation of the coronation rites. 102 The standard not only led out in the sed-

festival103 and at all other occasions marking royal succession to power, 104 but, harking back to the days of the prehistoric migration

and the settling of the land, it signified the

king’s taking possession of whatever ground

in which it was planted.105

In Egypt, as in India, where “the animal

was sui generis a numen, ” 106 the faithful dog was thought to precede his master to the

other world (the animal’s lifespan being

tragically short) and wait for him there, as he

ever ran ahead of him and waited with joyful

anticipation during life. It is not necessary to

see in Wepwawet a holdover from primitive

African animal worship107 since the relationship between man and dog has

always been an intimate one. But the Wepwawet who “plays the leading part” in

the sed-festival itself and plays “the same role in the Osiris mysteries at Abydos” 108 is represented not by a dog but by a priest

wearing a Wepwawet-mask. 109 In the funeral scenes of the Amduat, in fact, Wepwawet

never appears as an animal “but always in

human form.” 110 For he is “the son” and successor of the old king in the sed-rites.111

Wepwawet “opens for thee the beautiful

roads,” as the common expression is usually

rendered: Thus Frankfort: “Rising and

setting, with the Dog Star as guide, the dead

king moves on the beautiful roads which are

in the Field of Rushes.” 112 Nfr means, among other things, what is proper and necessary.

The important thing for the traveler here is to

get the right road, to know which one opens to heaven and which to earth, by which one it

is possible to ascend and by which one to

descend;113 and to be able to distinguish major and minor roads and give them their

proper names.114 It is the business of Wepwawet, the clever dog, to point the right

way: “the right ( nfr.t) roads are opened for thee by Wepwawet.” 115 The Eloquent Peasant insists over and over again, “My

way is nfr!” 116 meaning not that his path is beautiful, but that he is not trespassing and is

taking the way he should take. Everything is

done to achieve the purpose of the Book of

Breathings—namely, to provide “total

protection and security” for the dead on his

journey:117 “they make a road for me and keep lookout.” 118

In the Book of Two Ways, the voyage of

the sun-bark begins with a vigorous order

making sure that all systems are “go,” that all

ways are open: “Open, sky; open, earth.

Open, eastern horizon; open, western

horizon. Open, shrine of Upper Egypt; open,

shrine of Lower Egypt. Open, doors. Open, eastern doors, to Re that he may go forth

from the horizon,” etc. 119

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 41–

43

41. … They call thee Maat ( or they refer to thee as Maat) in the presence of

Osiris. They write the

42 (2/20). mȝʿ-ḫrw (Justified) formula

[ ideogram for speech or utterance] upon

thy body. Horus the protector of his father

[ JSP adds: Horus the Behdetite] protects

[ ḫw; JSP: ẖnm, embraces, unites with]

thy body and deifies thy spirit (ba) like all the gods [ JSP: as all the gods do, or in the manner of all the gods]. The ba 43. of Re is giving life to thy ba; the ba of Shu is infusing (uniting) thy two nostrils.

Commentary: Travel Insurance,

the Gods Cooperate

In lines 41–43, the body is sealed up

against destruction. It is stamped and sealed

as completely qualified to receive the ba and resume breathing.

Line 41: “They call thee Maat ( or they refer to thee as Maat) in the presence of Osiris”

This passage is rendered in different

ways. “You have been declared just before

Osiris.” 120 “La vérité te sera annoncée par Osiris. ” 121 One can announce the truth, and one can also be identified with Maat and

called Maat; which is it here? In the Berlin

Breathings text122 we have the answer:

“They say, ‘Maat is thy name!’” To be

“declared just” is, properly, not Maat, but

mȝʿ-ḫrw. “Maat,” as Otto observes, “is by

no means an abstract concept such as

Righteousness; she is entirely concrete.” 123

Yet one can be wholly identified with her:

“Atum comes to thee bearing Maat. … Thy father Shu and thy son Ra make thee Maat in

thy heritage, that thou mayest be in peace and

flourish by her. … O Amon-Re, Maat unites

herself to thy disk. … Maat is the great

(crown) on thy head!” 124 Maat, as noted above, is the only divinity that can be

identified with any and all other deities;125

she embodies the whole order of society, and

whoever receives Maat is Maat (fig. 103). 126

As the complete and perfect wedjat-eye, it is

“she to whom the body of the sun is united,

who is his flesh and his members.” 127 This being the case, to split hairs in translation of

the passage is pointless. The candidate is

called Maat and identified with Maat when

he is in a state of complete preparation.

Everyone who enters the presence of divinity

must “bring Maat with him, i.e., must himself

be in the condition of ‘Maat.’” 128 That is the condition of our initiate at this point; he is

now qualified for higher spheres. “M.a.a.t

must continually be actualized by men, in the

first place by the pharaoh.” 129 This explains the identification of Maat with Horus upon

assuming the kingship130 and favors the translation of the above passage, “they call

thee Maat in the presence of Osiris.”

Figure 103. Maat-feathers unlimited. The Two Maats, crowned with maat-feathers and holding maat- scepters, face the forty-two gods, also crowned with maat-symbols, while above, maat-feathers and scales denote the justice of the law. Note the intrusion of the serpents between the maat-feathers, representing the principle of opposition in all things. P.

Nebseni (BD 125), ca. 1440 B.C. BM 9900. ©

Copyright The British Museum.

Lines 41–42: “They write the mȝʿ-ḫrw formula upon thy body”

This suggests the “OK” stamp put on

sacrificial animals and persons by the

Egyptians to signify that the candidate for

sacrifice was physically perfect and

acceptable. 131 “I am the Red [or sacred]

Bull-calf which is marked with [written]

markings.” 132

Holy insignia were worn not only as

pendants and head plumes, but also on ritual

garments or marked on the body itself.

Sacred tattooing was important in Egypt: the

famous Queen Nefertiti was tattooed on the

arm with the Horus-eye and the uraeus. 133

The use of tattooing in the cults of Ptah and

Bes suggests great antiquity; it belongs to the

ancient mysteries elsewhere, notably in

Orphism, and Julien Tondriau suggests that

the Egyptian cultic tattooing was a substitute

for the most primitive of garments, a fig

leaf, 134 which suggests in turn the ancient Jewish tradition that Adam and Eve had

“characters and signs … written on their

brows … and the names of the Father and the

Son and the Holy Ghost were written on

their bodies in seven places.” 135 In a Coptic text which shows remarkable affinities with

our Book of Breathings, we read, “I adjure

you by the first seal [which was] placed on

the body of Adam … [and] by the second

seal on the members of Adam. … Send to me

thy breath of life.” 136

Jacques de Horrack reads this passage,

“The formulas of justification are (written)

upon thy body,” and Klaus Baer interprets it,

“‘ Justified has been written on your

body,’—just as the statue of the deceased

would be inscribed with his [the

candidate’s] name and the same epithet. ”137

In the Kerasher Breathings text, what is

written is mȝʿ.ty, with a determinative of

divinity instead of the feather. 138 But in none of the manuscripts is the writing designated

by the ordinary mȝʿ-ḫrw sign; in our text, the writer uses the determinative for “speech” or

“formula,” implying that words were

actually on the body, as when, in a washing

ceremony, “the name of father, mother,

children is written in green on the left (leg),”

and, at the same time, “inscribed shall be

their names on the bodies made of wax.” 139

Ritual identity with Maat was signified by

the actual wearing of her insignia, the green

maat-feather, or an image of the Lady herself wearing it. 140 More to the point, the ultimate in sacred investiture saw the initiate

“anointed with oil. … Natron must be behind

his ears, Bed-natron must be in his mouth, dressed in two new garments, having washed

himself in inundation water, shod in white

sandals, and the figure of the Truth goddess

[Maat] being painted on his tongue in green

painter’s colors. ”141 In Upper Egypt, where ancient customs still survive, it is still the

practice of the Coptic Christians to have

crosses tattooed on their bodies at significant

places. 142 Ludwig Keimer and H. R. Hall both assumed that a small figure of Osiris

wearing the atef-crown appearing on the

shoulder blade of one bronze statue of a

priest and on the right breast of another

represents a tattoo; Jean Yoyotte, however,

rejected this, noting that such tattooing has

never been found on a mummy.143 The readiest explanation would be that such

figures were painted on the body temporarily

for the performance of rites or “written on

their bodies” as part of the daily rites. 144

Such practices were specifically forbidden

in Israel (Leviticus 19:28).

Line 42: “Horus the protector (avenger) of his father protects (guards) thy body and

deifies (sanctifies) thy spirit ( ba) like all the gods”

The idea is that being immortal and divine,

the candidate rates the status of godhood. In

the Joseph Smith Papyrus, Horus the

protector is specifically Horus the Behdetite,

the rescuer who figures conspicuously in the

Sokar-festival and whose special calling is

to protect the god on his journeys; he is first

and foremost a fighter, as is seen in the

Horus myth of Edfu (fig. 104). 145 As settler of the Two Lands he overthrows the

opposing or disgruntled inhabitants.146

Usually he is represented by the winged

disk, the outspread wings affording

“protection against all evil.” 147

Figure 104. Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II destroys the enemies of Horus the Behdetite. Egyptian texts often hint at episodes of violence and conquest by Horus in prehistoric times. Rollout drawing of column from

temple of Isis, Philae, ca. 140 B.C. Champollion,

Monuments, 1: pl. XCI.

In this section, the subject is receiving the

final preparations for a journey: he is

equipped with a passport by Thoth, all fixed

up with apotropaic signs by Maat, and now

is given a personal bodyguard in the form of

the greatest fighter and campaigner of them

all, Horus the Behdetite.148

Lines 42–43: “The ba of Re is giving life to

thy ba; the ba of Shu is infusing (uniting) thy two nostrils.” 149

It is more than a coincidence that Maat,

Horus the Behdetite, and Shu cooperate in

preparing the candidate against the perils of

the journey ahead. Shu bears the same truth-

and-justice feather as Maat (fig. 105; see p.

285, fig. 94), 150 which also denotes “the gentle refreshing breeze, … the vibrant light

… scattering the darkness,” light and truth

being as inseparable in Egyptian as in

Christian thought. 151 Life comes with the opening of the mouth and the eye in that

order—the feather of Maat, Shu, and Horus

the Behdetite signifies both “ma and shou, words signifying ‘light,’ the maat-feather,

with its filaments, symbolized the rays” of

the sun;152 breath and light both restore life, as the scepter and the feather give birth to the

Sun’s Eye. 153 Erik Hornung notes that in such

expressions “we seem to be in the world of

scientific elemental particles” rather than of

abstract moral values, and “rather of

formulas than of beings.” 154

Figure 105. “Shu the Lord of Heaven” supports the

sky-mother Nut, “Great Mother of the Gods,” and

spans the space between her and Geb the earth-god.

Shu’s symbol is the same as that of Maat, the feather symbolizing air, space, light, breath—the conveyor rather than the source of life. Redrawn from the

mummy case of Tabakenkhonsu, ca 950 B.C.

Courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

“Uniting” or “fusing” with the nostrils is an expression of complete intimacy. Shu was

the son of Re, with whom he early fused as

the “Sun’s Eye, ”155 just as Maat was the apple of Re’s eye. In the present passage, the

ba s of the gods fuse in the nostrils of the initiate, which was possible since “the ba

could live in a body not its own.” 156 The king must receive the vital breath from Shu

so that he and his followers can revive

Osiris with it. 157 In one dramatic episode Shu revives his son, who has rebelled

against him, “by the breaths of his (own)

mouth, meant for ( r-ḏbȝw) his son Horus.” 158

The ultimate joining “of the Ba to its Ka and

body was supposed to take place in

Heliopolis” 159 through the power of the Sun.

In this Shu is the great mediator, being both

light and air. Morenz holds that Shu is here

not only identical with Re, but has a special

relationship to him as “the son,” meaning

“the son of the primal god, Re-Atum of Heliopolis”; 160 it is in this capacity of “the son” that he is absorbed into the father, as

Akhenaton fused with his father Aton by first

assuming the identity of Shu. 161 In our text the “ba of Re gives life” and “the ba of Shu”

starts the breathing; the idea that with the

“breath of life” one becomes “a living soul

(or ba)” is familiar to all from Genesis 2:7.

Shu is the great go-between, the mediator of

life; he is the light-filled and light-conveying

space between heaven and earth, and the

business of the children of Shu is “to support

and fill the boundless space between heaven

and earth.” 162 This is strongly suggestive of the Christian and gnostic doctrine of the Son

(Shu) as an emanation of the Father from the

“treasury of light.” When Geb declares

Horus his heir, he says to him, “Son of my

Son. … As Shu gave it to me, so I give it to

thee,” with Shu as the perennial

intermediary.163

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 44–

54

44 (3/1). Hail thou, Osiris, God’s Father, the Prophet of Amon-Re King of the Gods,

Prophet

45. of Min-Amon, Wsỉr-Wr [ JSP: Osiris Hor], Justified, Son of [ JSP: born of Taykhebyt] Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified.

Thy ba breathes in (any)

46. place thou desirest, thou being in the

place (seat) of Osiris; Chief of the

Westerners is thy name. It is Hapy the

ancient (the great), the inundation-god,

who comes to thee from Elephantine,

47 . filling thine offering table with offerings of meat and fowl. O Osiris, God’s Father,

Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of

48 (3/5). Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified! There come to thee the gods of Upper Egypt and

Lower Egypt to guide thee

49. in acquiring a full knowledge of the

eternities, that thy soul might live, and that

thou mayest follow Osiris and breathe in Rostau.

50. Ḥȝpw-nb=s ( i.e. , the necropolis) and the great god protect thee. Thy corpse lives in

51. Busiris of the Thinite nome while thy

ba lives in heaven all the time (every

day). Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, 52. Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy,

Justified! Sekhmet hath power ( sḫm) over

those who conspire against thee.

53 (3/10). Horus the Great of Heart is

providing (making) thy protection; Horus the Rescuer [ JSP: the Behdetite]

is procuring (making) thy heart, Horus the

Seer is guarding

54. thy body.

Commentary: They Equip Him

with a Viaticum

All roads are now open to the candidate,

who can breathe any atmosphere. But before

he can enter the next phase, which is a

coronation scene, he must be in firm

possession of the three things that a king must

always be able to supply: an abundance of

the earth’s goods to sustain his subjects,

victory over all his enemies, and supernal

knowledge and wisdom. These things are

guaranteed to the subject in this section.

Lines 44–46: “Hail thou, Osiris, God’s Father, the Prophet of Amon-Re King of the

Gods, Prophet of Min-Amon, Wsỉr-Wr,

Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified.

Thy ba breathes in (any) place thou desirest, thou being in the place of Osiris; Chief of the

Westerners is thy name”

The candidate is identified by a new name

with Osiris the king, which is consistent with

the coronation formulas in the following sections.

Lines 46–47: “It is Hapy the ancient (the great), the inundation-god, who comes to

thee from Elephantine, filling thine offering

table with offerings of meat and fowl”

Hapy, who provides food for the trip, is

not the Nile in general, but, as Adriaan de

Buck has shown, “Ḥʿpj exclusively means

the Inundation” ;164 nay, it is “always an abundant, an abnormally great

inundation.” 165 The theme is abundance.

Here we go back to the wash water with

which the Book of Breathings began, for that

had to be Nile water from which all life

emerged;166 “the water … was said to come from Elephantine, … the traditional source

of the Nile,” being nothing less than “the

vital fluid that had exuded from the murdered

Osiris … beneath the island of Biga”; hence

it “was regarded as especially pure and potent, bubbling up direct, as it were, from

the god”:167 “I have come to you, Osiris,”

says the initiate, “that I may worship you,

that I may become clean through your

effluvium” (fig. 106).168 When Osiris is all but dead, it is the Nile flood that revives

him: “I bring the Nile on the night of

weeping (for Osiris),” says an inscription on

a lion-shaped water spout in the temple of

Thebes.169 It was by the prayers of the king that the Nile rose to bring the waters of life

to Egypt, 170 just as it was his grace at meals that brought abundance to the land.171 An inscription from the time of Zoser calls

Elephantine “the first city of the beginning,

… the beginning of the land, the Mountain of

Geb (the primal hill). It is the exaltation of

Re … to give life to every man. … ‘The Two

Abysses of the Water’ is the name of the

water. There are the two breasts that (bring

forth) all good things, … the bed where the Nile renews himself to bring forth a new

inundation.” 172 The body of the defunct, “like that of Osiris, was revivified” by waters

first thought of as the waters of Nun and then

as coming from Elephantine, the source of

the Nile. 173 Both traditions are recalled in the fifth hour of the Amduat, when a great

pouring of water from jars represents the

flooding of the Nile and the returning to

Osiris “out of the Nun” of all that ever

belonged to him; 174 and by “a great vase …

the Two Lands were flooded with their

brightness, like the stars in the body of

Nut. ”175 Libation, birth, and breathing are inseparably connected. 176 At Elephantine the waters of the Nile burst forth from “the Cave

of Time,” which the Greeks called the

abaton, a word meaning “unapproachable,”

etc., but which László Kákosy now derives

from the Egyptian ỉ ȝ.t wʿb.t, “the mound of

washing. ”177 In the end, every miraculous function of water is traced back to

Elephantine; when lustration became

libation, both had to be with water from

Elephantine because that was thought to be

the source of the Nile,178 “the flood which comes out of the cavern. … Thou art the

watery abyss, the oldest, the father of the

gods.” 179 Understandably, there exists “the closest relationship between a high

inundation and the sed-festival,” or the royal jubilee of the coronation. 180

Figure 106. Hapy, the Inundation, whose waters

revive vegetable and animal life. As a life-bringer, Hapy is both masculine and feminine, but like Thoth and Shu, he is a conveyor of life rather than a

begetter; his waters sustain the food on which life depends, but he does not create either. Restored

drawing from temple of Isis, Philae, 150 B.C.

The theme of abundance thus does not take

us from the familiar motifs of washing and

reviving and creation; neither does Hapy

change the scene from Horus and Shu, for at

the creation Horus the Behdetite “hath

become Abundance upon earth.” The Table-

god is an Emanation of Shu.181

The Goyon Book of Breathings makes a

great deal of Hapy: “O Hapy, Father of the

Gods, (turn) thy face toward me! … Come to

me [as] the water of youth every day!

Refresh my heart in the flowing waters … !

Grant that I be powerful ( sḫm) in the water, even as Sekhmet.” 182 Otto has shown how the mention of Sekhmet in connection with

Hapy was meant to point to the Nile in ritual

as the great fertilizer and giver of

harvests. 183 The Breathings text continues with a discourse on the preexistence (lines

50–60a), for the Nile as “the primal water

[of Nun] from which all things arose”184

signifies the preexistent power of creation,

of the ceaseless and irresistible ongoing

bringing forth of life in all its abundance and

variety.185 Since Ptah, here identified with the waters of creation, never ceases to

create, “he is [also] Hapy, the Father of the

Gods,” with whom the candidate identifies himself. 186 The power to create is the power to re-create, and here the initiate proclaims

his powers of eternal rejuvenation. 187 Hapy represents everything human beings think of

as “success.” 188 The Coptic Christians continued to glory in the blessings of the

Nile and to engage in rites to secure them. 189

Guides Are Provided for the

Journey

The hailing of the initiate indicates that

this begins a new section. The theme is still

protection, but guides are supplied with the

necessary instruction and knowledge. The

passage is ambiguous because it is

unfamiliar, and varies greatly among the

manuscripts, showing the perplexity of the

ancient scribes.

Lines 47–49: “O Osiris, God’s Father,

Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified! There come to thee the gods of

Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt to guide thee

in acquiring (gaining) a full knowledge of the

eternities ( lit. millions of years), that thy soul might live, and that thou mayest follow

Osiris and breathe in Rostau”

Figure 107. Horus and Anubis are the two principal guides of the dead, the one conducting him to the

world below, the other leading him out of it to the light past the scales of judgment. P. Hunefer, ca. 1300

B.C. BM 9901 © Copyright The British Museum.

Two divine persons appear to instruct the

candidate. In Baer’s rendering, they come

“to show you how to spend millions of years

in all together with your ba.” 190 But the

“together with” not only is awkward but is

also plainly a copyist’s error, as de Horrack

points out, since it is missing in all the other

manuscripts and is supplanted in Papyrus

Louvre N. 3291 by the word ʿnḫ, which

looks just like it and makes much better

sense: “that thy soul might live,” instead of

the meaningless “in all together with your

ba.” The initiate is led toward ʿrq, which Raymond Faulkner renders “know, perceive,

gain full knowledge of,” 191 and which could well refer to a course of instruction.

The safest assumption is that the two

august personages have come to instruct the

candidate in the things of the eternities which

he must know to follow the way of Osiris,

the first initiate. In the temple reliefs of

Ramses II, two special guides conduct the

king to the temple; they are depicted as

ordinary men without any divine

characteristics or insignia, but one of them is of immense size and the other gives ʿnḫ

symbols to the king. In parallel cases the two

guides are Anubis and Horus (fig. 107), or

Montu and Atum. 192 Likewise, the king in the temple reliefs is crowned by two human-faced gods who should be Horus and Thoth

but who do not wear the usual identifying

masks or insignia.193 In the third hour of the Stundenwache, the two noble ones (Hapi and

Anubis?) come to endow Osiris as he comes

from the first gate;194 the god himself “is standing on the ỉdb (threshold) of the

horizon,” having come “to give instructions

to those in ẖr.t-nṯr.” At the sed-festival the king announces: “I have run the course, when

I grasped the secret (teachings) of the Two

Men, the testament ( mks) which my father

Geb gave to me.” Peter Munro suggests that

the two men here are Osiris and Seth—but

why are they not so named? 195 In some

episodes the initiate is met by only one helper, appropriately the great teacher:

“Thoth hath come to see thee … ; awake

when thou hearest his words. … I have come

as the envoy [Sent One] of my Father A.tem.

My two arms are upon thee.” 196

As in the Jewish and Christian apocryphal

and biblical accounts, the “Sent Ones”

would seem to go ordinarily in pairs.

E. A. E. Reymond calls attention in the Edfu

temple texts of the sending to earth at the

creation of “two divine beings, … Wa and

ʿAā, … also called the Two Companions of the Divine of Heart ( tšwỉ ntrỉ-ỉb) , and are said to be leaders of a group of divine

beings called shebtiw, ” those mysterious

beings sent to earth from time to time during

the course of its creation to oversee the

progress of the work. 197 As Reymond explains it, “the divine beings called shebtiw are those who are primarily responsible for

any action of creation which came to pass”

upon the newly created earth; yet they are not

the creators, but only agents, Sent Ones, who

always “seem to have been subjects of a

higher power.” 198 They organized the world after the manner of what had been done in

other worlds. Their special calling was to

prepare the grounds for the rites of the

temple. 199 Thus it would seem that mysterious pairs of visitors were sent down

to earth not only to supervise the phases of

its creation, but also to instruct men

concerning all things, “the knowledge of the

eternities,” as our Breathings Text seems to

have it. In Papyrus Salt 825, three divine

beings visit the earth to instruct mankind in

the ordinances; they are personified in the

temple drama by three actor-priests

representing Shu, the bald priest ( fkty) , the venerable and wise one; Horus, the executor

of orders ( ḥnṯṯy); and Thoth the sš mḏȝ.t nṯr,

who records everything that is done.200 The theme is always instruction, and each one

who receives it passes it on. Thus the

shebtiw are learners as well as teachers, for

“the God-of-the-Temple summoned the two

Shebtiw, and apparently instructed them in

the manner of creating,” 201 and they in turn exchange information with Tanen, whereupon

“a new generation of creators appeared, …

the ‘Builder Gods.’” 202 As they reenact the procedures of creation, repeating “all the

acts of creation already known,” 203 which have been revealed to them by “the Ka

himself, ”204 the shebtiw both receive and give instruction.

We must have a “guide to lead us to the

gates of knowledge where the glorious light

and the pure shadow are,” says one text.205

To instruct is to conduct. In the Coffin Texts

the deceased is brought before Osiris, “the

Guide of the Living,” to follow ( or bless,

smȝʿ-ḫrw) his footsteps. To the terror of the watchers, he casts off the dust and fills his

body with immortal power, going down to

lead every blessed spirit ( ȝḫ) to the Isle of Flame. For he knows the ordinances (spells)

and will supply all the necessary instruction

to conduct one to the highest powers ( Ḥqȝ

and šwty) . 206

Figure 108. The inscription says that the man being led by Anubis is “setting out on the road ( šsp wȝ.t) in Rostau.” P. Turin 1791 (BD 117), ca. 150 B.C.

Courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

A constantly recurring theme in early

Jewish and Christian apocrypha is the appearance of unearthly beings to comfort

the afflicted patriarch and guide him on his

tour through the other worlds; sometimes

they pull in opposite directions. 207 The Abraham traditions are among the most

instructive. We are told that “the archangel

Jaoel was specifically sent by God to

instruct [Abraham] and to initiate him into

the knowledge of the heavenly mysteries,”

but Jaoel “here seems to play the part of

Metatron-Michael”208—that is, Jehovah (the Metatron) is confused with Michael. The one

who taught Abraham, according to Rabbi

Eliezer, was Michael, the Prince of the

World, “for he discloses all the secrets of the

world. ”209 It was Christ himself, as “the true prophet,” who came down and taught

Abraham all the mysteries, according to the

Clementine Recognitions, and hence the

knowledge spread to the Egyptians.210

Line 49: “that thou mayest … breathe in Rostau”

Rostau is conventionally identified with

the necropolis of Gizeh or the tomb of Osiris

near Memphis211 and hence with the grave or tomb as such, 212 but that is only part of the story (fig. 108; see p. 255, fig. 80). Gaston

Maspero suggested rȝ-stȝ.w as meaning

“porte ( rȝ) des couloirs ( stȝ.w),” “porte des halages,” a gateway to passages or

portages.213 The gateway nature of the place is constantly emphasized, and early

Egyptologists compared it to Vergil’s fauces

Orci. 214 Though the term “designated the necropolis,” it applies “properly to the

entrance of the empire of Osiris.” 215

Hornung sees in the stȝ.w element “a sloping passage,” along which the sarcophagus was

dragged, 216 while Hermann Junker takes the first element as a form of ỉry and so rendered

rȝ-stȝ.w Handlung des Ziehens—“the business of pulling. ”217 In the fourth hour of the Amduat, Rostau is the sandy region “over

which the sun-bark is drawn,” a place short

on water, swarming with snakes, the nearest

point of possible suffocation reached by

parties passing through the Amduat. 218 It is the land passage through the underworld.219

The significant point is that Rostau is not a

place where one stays but always only a

place of passage. Baer renders it “‘The

Tomb-Shafts,’ a term of ‘necropolis’ in

general and a part of that of Giza in

particular,” 220 thus characteristically treating the shafts not as a means of passage but

simply as a synonym for the one-way trip to

the necropolis. Most Egyptologists accept

Rostau as a gate. One does not end one’s

journey in a gate—gates are for passing on

through: “Whoever knows this picture of the

secret ways of Rostau … and the hidden

gates in the land of Sokar on the sand … eats bread beside the living temple of Atum. ”221

The dead has no intention of staying on the

sterile sands of Rostau.

It is admitted that there actually was a

place in prehistoric Egypt called Rostau, but

“where in Western Thebes the ‘Valley’ or

‘Upper Restau’ were located is difficult to

say, ”222 for the name is applied to a number of places. The name may originally have

belonged to the necropolis at Memphis,

being later applied to that of Thebes, 223 and thereafter extended to other places. 224

Indeed, the name of Rostau may be fittingly

applied to any place of ordinances for the

dead if Mayassis is right: “Rostau is a place

or region eminently suited for the initiate and

the soul, the place of perfect knowledge.” 225

It “remains the region of passage where one

beholds the celestial mysteries,” and as such

“it corresponds to the passage of the temple,

or the tombs, or the initiatory sanctuaries on earth.” 226 Far from being bad and depressing, the Memphite rȝ-sṯȝ.w, Zandee claims, was “a place of beatitude.” 227

Wilhelm Czermak calls Rostau the

“hochgewordene Land” — the land that rose

up—and a place of deep study “penetrating

into the secrets of the earth.” 228 Taken in its various contexts, the word rȝ-sṯȝ.w (usually vocalized Rostau) strongly supports the

initiatory concept as opposed to the purely

funerary utility of the rites concerned.

It is notable that while it is often stated in

the Book of Breathings that the subject is

going to heaven to dwell there forever and ever, it is never indicated that he is going to

the underworld forever, though that is the

theme which some scholars see in every

sentence. Indeed, in our text it is never

unequivocally stated that the dead is in the

underworld at all! This is because every

term denoting the underworld is ambiguous:

“the duality of heaven/underworld …

dominates the beyond of the New

Kingdom”; 229 on the other hand, the terms denoting heaven and celestial exaltation are

quite clear and unequivocal. While in early

times, as Hornung notes, the afterlife is

depicted only in heaven and not beneath the earth,230 from first to last heaven remains the preferred residence. 231

Line 50: “Ḥȝpw-nb=s and the great god protect thee”

Ḥȝpw-nb=s means “she whose Lord is

hidden”; the Kerasher version calls her

Ḥȝpw-nb=s-Rʿ and a variant supplied by de

Horrack reads Ḥȝpw-nb=f-Rʿ, “he whose

lord Re is hidden.” The mysterious lady’s

name is written with a geographic

determinative because it is a place—the

cemetery at Abydos where Osiris lies hidden

and where the sun is also in the underworld.

A significant parallel is offered by the lady

Mk.t-nb=s, which also means “she who

protects her lord” ( mk.t is the opening word of the present sentence in our text) and is the

name of the second hour of the Amduat,

when “a god speaks to a god. ”232 Nf.t-mk.t, the “protectress,” is the “power that repels,”

“Abwehr” as a sȝ or “active power. ”233

There is a lady Šsȝt.mk.t-nb=s, “the clever one who protects her lord,” who takes over

in the first hour of the Amduat, her name

being shortened in the second hour to Mk.t-

nb=s. 234

The fullest form of her name is Dwȝt.t-

mk.t-nb=s, “the worshipping one who

protects her lord.” 235 From the Twenty-first to the Twenty-fifth Dynasty, the four sons of

Horus, the “canopic” figures, take over the

business of protection, but with the Twenty-

sixth Dynasty the ladies return, offering

protection, designated as stp sȝ, bsȝ, or mk.t.236 As we have seen, the initiate starts out with Two Ladies or Two Maats in the

Book of Breathings; in the long version Two

Ladies provide water and two others

provide protection.237

This section provides an interesting tour of

cemeteries to the defunct, an itinerary of

sanctification. It begins with the statement in

lines 45–46 that the ba will be able to

breathe in whatever place it chooses to visit;

then we are told of food brought from

Elephantine (line 46); then the subject is

promised that he can follow Osiris and go on

breathing in Rostau (line 49); and finally he

is told:

Figure 109. At Busiris, falcons with the heads of Re and Osiris perch on a temple before two djed-columns. P. Ani, ca. 1250 B.C. BM 10470 ©

Copyright The British Museum.

Lines 50–51: “Thy corpse lives in Busiris of the Thinite nome while thy ba lives (is alive) in heaven all the time (every day)”

Thus there is a steady progress from the

extreme south (Elephantine, the subterranean

sources of life) to the extreme northern

shrine (Busiris, the age-old Egyptian center

of human sacrifice) and so on up to heaven

itself. Busiris is the classic place of

sacrificial death. 238 But what is Busiris, the famous Delta shrine,239 doing in the Thinite nome ( Ṯȝ-wr)? Here Ṯȝ-wr has a special

meaning as a place of creation and resurrection; twr means a purified place, a station along the primal way of salvation

traveled by Tanen and the falcon in the

beginning. 240 Horus the Behdetite came from Busiris as “Lord of the Pure Place ( Twr, Ṯȝ-wr),” which he purified from wickedness in the beginning for a fresh creation of the

world. 241 In our text Busiris is written with two djed-columns (fig. 109), the name of the place being Ḏdw, the ḏd whose rites were celebrated there from prehistoric times being

a bundle of greenery which, according to

Wolfgang Helck, represented the familiar

last sheaf of the old harvest carried over into

the rebirth rites of the new.242 As the foundation column of a new world, the djed-symbol is “the most sacred emblem of the

perished world,” the symbol of transition

from age to age and from creation to

creation.243

While “thy corpse lives in Busiris, … thy ba lives (is alive) in heaven.” “Thy mortal body is in Heliopolis, … but thy ba is in

heaven above. ”244 The soul ( ba) shines in the sky, while the underworld conceals his

body. 245

Protection Is Guaranteed

Lines 51–52: “Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified! Sekhmet hath power ( sḫm) over

those who conspire against thee”

This is a typical play on words. 246

Sekhmet is the most warlike and terrifying

form of the mother-goddess, appearing as a

fire-breathing lioness of the eastern desert

bearing a huge sacrificial knife in her

hand.247 The theme of this brief section (lines 51–54), set apart by the candidate’s

name without any of the usual titles, is the

providing of a military escort, consisting of four warlike figures. Beside the formidable

Sekhmet we have:

Lines 53–54: “Horus the Great of Heart is providing ( lit. making) thy protection; Horus the Rescuer is procuring ( lit. making) thy heart; Horus the Seer is guarding thy body”

Horus, in three capacities or forms,

provides the three operations essential to an

army on the march: protection (defensive

capability), capacity of attack (offensive

capability), and intelligence and

reconnaissance. Specifically, “Horus the

Great of Heart” is responsible for the morale

and safety ( mk.t) of the march. The

Wörterbuch renders ʿȝ ỉb, literally “great of heart,” as “hochherzig (?), hochmütig (?)—

high spirited.” 248 In the form ʿȝ ḥȝty=k, it means “great heart,” etc. 249 Thus it is apparent, as de Buck notes, that the

Egyptians used expressions of the heart in very much the same sense that we do

today. 250 From this we conclude that our Horus the Great of Heart is primarily

responsible for morale.

The next Horus is called Ḥr Šdy.t, and in some of the manuscripts, including the

Joseph Smith version, “Horus the

Behdetite.” The former term, meaning “He of

Crocodilopolis,” is an epithet of Horus as a

crocodile. 251 We have commented elsewhere on the crocodile as protector and restorer of

life, but at all times the foremost quality of

the beast is its dangerous and aggressive

nature. 252 The probable location of Behdet is the region of Ṯȝ-wr and Busiris, mentioned above. 253 Horus the Behdetite is, before all else, a campaigning warrior, “Lord of

Battle,” especially on the water;254 he is the defender of the sun-god against Seth, who

tries to hold up his progress. 255 He

overcomes the enemy at the crossing of the

Red Sea, “the Sea of Hasty Crossing. ”256 As he makes his own royal progress, he

embraces ( snsn) his images at each of his

shrines along the way,257 revealing his nature as “the idolatrous god of Pharaoh.” 258 In a logbook of royal travels in the manner of the

sun, 259 he goes forth from the temple of Edfu, where he was born, making his rounds of the

heavens as a winged disk (fig. 110; cf.

p. 147, fig. 39), 260 returning to his point of departure “to rest for a while” in the

temple. 261 As son and heir of the sun-god, Horus the Behdetite is given dominion over

“the entire earth … as far as the sunlight

reaches … forever and ever.” 262

Figure 110. The famous winged disk, found over the doorways of Egyptian temples, represents the

protecting wings of Horus the Behdetite sheltering the king and goes back to prehistoric times in Egypt.

Temple of Horus, Edfu, ca. 100 B.C.

While šdty means “He of

Crocodilopolis,” 263 the verb šdỉ means to extricate or rescue; hence Baer rightly calls

Ḥr Šdty “Horus the Savior.” 264 He is the type of the prehistoric leader of migration,

battle, and settlement in the old temple

traditions, according to Reymond;265 in his fiercer nature he is also a lion who gives the

flesh of enemies to his companions to eat. 266

He is represented by a huge knife of Behdet-

silex, which overthrows all rebels, 267 and he goes the length of the Nile subduing the

entire land in a series of naval victories in

behalf of Re, its new possessor. 268 He is thus eminently suited to provide the main thrust of

the dangerous march. He provides the

“heart” of the expedition in a neat chiasm

and pun in the Berlin manuscript of the Book of Breathings:

Ḥr ʿȝ ỉb ḥr ỉr mk.t=k

Ḥr mk.t ḥr ỉr ỉb=k

Horus Great Heart is making thy

protection;

Horus the Protector is making thy

heart.269

The third Horus is Horus the seer, acting

as military reconnaissance or intelligence.

His function is confirmed rather than

obscured by the substitution of another name

in this place, Mr.t, in Papyrus Berlin

3135. 270 Horus himself is sometimes called nb mr.ty, written with two eyes as a

determinative, and it sometimes appears as

Ḥr mr.ty. In this context mr.t is itself the divine eye271 and can be substituted as a writing for Maat. Mr.t was a musician-goddess, indispensable in the Horus-cult, 272

and so closely bound to the god that her own

name is written with the determinative of the Horus-hawk. The idea seems to be that of the

Horus-hawk in its capacity of the sharp-eyed

one.

Every Man a King

Lines 54 to 64 of the de Horrack text

contain the closing section of the Joseph

Smith Book of Breathings, which ends in a

burst of coronation splendor. That this is the

real ending and that we need not be unduly

disappointed if no more columns of the

Joseph Smith text are discovered is apparent

if we compare its last line with those of

other Breathings texts. Thus where the

Joseph Smith Papyrus concludes: nn wn

ḫftyw=k ỉw=k m bȝ nṯry, “thine enemies no longer exist; thou art a divine ba,” the text in Papyrus Louvre N. 3279 text ends: ỉnk nṯr ʿȝ

pr m nṯr, “I am a great god who comes forth as (or from) a god.” The Sensaos version

also ends abruptly with the declaration that the initiate is now Lord of the Elements, that

being, according to Stricker, the usual ending

of the version once known as “Que mon nom

fleurisse. ”273 Furthermore, “the short version of the Book of Two Ways … ends with the

deceased able to identify himself with the

god Osiris who prevails over his

enemies,” 274 while the winding-up of the longer version is introduced by a coronation

trumpet call: “Make way for me that I may

receive the great crown (which is) upon

Horus. ”275 The accent on coronation at the culmination of the rites is entirely right and

proper. “The concepts of creation, sunrise,

and kingly rule are continually merged,”

wrote Frankfort.276 The awakening sem-priest is the awakening Osiris, the

awakening king, at whose stirring from the

sleep of death all things rejoice with great

jubilation. 277 In our text, just before the

initiate is awakened by the rays of Re, he is hailed as a king at his coronation.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 54–

58

54. … Thou art ( or Be) firm in possession of life, prosperity, health, remaining upon

thy throne in the holy land (Deseret).

Come thou, Osiris, God’s Father,

55. Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified! Thou appearest in glory in

56. thy proper and perfect ( twt) form [ JSP

has a different spelling: tyt for qȝỉ.w], in thy full ceremonial regalia, which you

prepared while you were alive ( or

Having made preparation in life), thou

passest the day hale and hearty, walking

about and

57. breathing everywhere. Re shines upon

thy cavern (house, hill [ JSP: high place]),

Osiris ( or O Osiris!), that thou mayest ( or mayest thou) breathe and live 58 (3/15). by his rays. It is Amon-Re who

causeth thy ka [ JSP adds: living, protecting, or prospering] to live. It is

[ JSP adds: in or by] the Book of Breathings that causeth thee to flourish.

Commentary: Coronation Imagery

Line 54: “Thou art firm in possession of life, prosperity, health”

The life, prosperity, health formula is that

which is always placed immediately after

the name of the king or the title of His

Majesty. This is enough in itself to indicate

that the imagery of this section is that of the

coronation since the formula is not applied

to common mortals. 278

The Initiate on the Throne in the

Holy Land

Line 54: “Thou art … remaining upon thy throne in the holy land”

Given the royal salutation of life,

prosperity, health, “throne” is a better

rendering than “seat” here. The place- or

house-determinative is a reminder that “the

throne is heaven. ”279 The Goyon Book of Breathings makes this quite clear: “I am

Horus of millions of sed-festivals

(coronation jubilees), ruler upon the throne

of all the lands, … Horus, the heir of Re” ;280

“my throne is Heliopolis, my seat is the

White Wall (Memphis), my house is

Hermopolis; my seats are all the nomes,

which are under my written orders” ;281 “I am victorious as Lord of the wrr.t-crown. … I overcome mine enemies. … I am mighty like

Atum! I walk with my legs, I speak with my

mouth, I see with my eyes, I hear with my

ears.” 282 The wrr.t-crown is the crown of the

victorious Horus worn by the beatified dead, 283 and from this passage it appears that the Opening of the Mouth makes one a king

to rule and reign. In the pyramid rite, the

dead had to be crowned as Horus before he

could begin his final journey to heaven, the

forcible and victorious breaking out of the

tomb being identified with the coronation

itself. 284 In assuming the exalted atef-crown of Osiris, the dead is not presuming to rival

or supplant the god, but rather to be as much

like the “divine ‘prototype’” as possible. 285

The mȝʿ-ḫrw formula in itself is enough,

according to Thausing, to mark the funeral

rites as a coronation. 286 The designation of the dead as a king is, however, in the later

period “no claim to social status, but only a

religious gesture ( Anliegen),” 287 the coronation being the standard “seal of divine

recognition and the promise of divine

blessing. ”288

Figure 111. The figure of the Red Crown of Lower

Egypt is of prehistoric antiquity and has the phonetic values of n, bỉt (meaning bee), and dšr.t. This invites speculation by those interested in the strange modern title of Deseret with its various implications. Can the peculiar wire loop protruding from the crown

represent an antenna?

But the sed-festival, celebrating and

renewing the coronation of the king, cannot

take place unless on the preceding evening a

royal funeral has been celebrated; 289 far from being in conflict, funerary and

coronation rites “coalesced into a single

celebration” at the sed-festival. 290 Even when the king was his own successor, as

was usual at the sed-festival, “the ‘old king’

(must) be buried, so that the ‘new king’ can

mount the throne.” 291 As Horus becomes

Osiris, so Osiris in the resurrection becomes Horus: without a coronation the drama is not

complete. 292 The coronation rites, however, took place neither at a tomb nor in the palace

but, significantly, in the temple, as part of the

regular temple ordinances. 293

Since the king is “the type and model” for

all to follow in the rites,294 the coronation imagery is prominent. When discovered, the

dead owners of the various Books of

Breathings were wearing crowns. 295 Also, kings must be priests, and candidates to

immortality must be both priests and kings—

a point which Alexandre Moret has

demonstrated at considerable length. 296 The culmination of all initiation is coronation.

Since “the same drama in ever-narrowing

concentric circles is carried out for every

individual, … every individual person may

experience his own coronation,

corresponding to that of the king.” 297 There

is a fusion of personality in the coronation situation, he who assumes the crown being

identified with whoever else wears it.298

The climax of the underground ceremonies of

the pyramid rites is the coronation of the

image in the serdab, 299 by which the king becomes fused with the sun-god, receiving

the name Haroeris: Horus the Lord of the

smaragd (green stone). 300

Because of its peculiar resemblance to our

own “Deseret,” both in sound and meaning,

the word for “holy land,” tȝ-dšr.t (or ḏsr.t) deserves a moment of attention (fig. 111).

Which land it designates depends on the

context in which it is used, and it is natural

in a funeral text to translate it as

“Necropolis” and “Netherworld. ”301 Yet dšr.t also means “red land, the desert,”

specifically the red land of Lower Egypt,

that also being the name of “the red crown of

Lower Egypt.” 302 The red crown, in turn, is

interchangeable with the sign of the bee when it represents bỉt(y), “king of Lower Egypt” ;303 indeed, the red crown symbol “is substituted for [the bee] for superstitious

reasons”304—possibly concealing the true name of the bee as dšr.t. At any rate, the red crown of the lady Neith, with its peculiar

wirelike protuberance which suggests the

antenna of a bee,305 did have the name of dšr.t and went back to the time of the

migrations into Egypt. Joseph Smith

attributed peculiar significance to the bee of

the prehistoric, migrating Jaredites (Ether

2:3). The bee and the name Deseret still

designate for the Mormons not only the

honey bee but the land itself, the idealized

state of Deseret, of which the bee is the

symbol. Morenz sees in Tȝ-ḏsr (note the

different sound values attributed to the word

by different scholars) not so much a holy

land as a “land set apart,” suggesting the

realm of the mysteries, in entering which one must “be qualified for a godly sphere.” 306

This suggests Tȝ-ḏsr, “holy land” as a “land of preparation,” which Mayassis suggests is

holy ground where only an initiate may be

buried. 307

In Full Ceremonial Regalia

Lines 54–56: “Come thou, Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified! Thou appearest in glory in thy proper and perfect (true) form, in thy full

ceremonial regalia”

In lines 55–58, the imagery of

resurrection, royal aubade, and the mounting

of the throne fuse in the daily morning toilet

of the king. The verb ḫʿỉ, “appear in glory,”

applies equally to the sun or to the king

arising in splendor to the top of the primal

mountain or the exalted throne.308 Bergman makes ḫʿỉ equal to bs nsw.t, the achievement

of royal initiation. 309 Our text uses both qỉ=k and twt=k for “thy form,” the former

emphasizing the inner nature, 310 the latter the outward appearance. Essential to the king’s

appearing in glory was his full ceremonial

attire, the dressing of the king being the main

business after his washing just before

sunrise. 311 Whether in coronation, temple, or funeral rites, the ceremonial “equipping” of

the candidate with symbolic vestments

shows him “ready to play the role in the

divine world ( monde divin) where he is

going to continue his existence.” 312

Anointing and clothing rites belong primarily

to coronation.313 It is by being clothed in full ritual attire that the candidate becomes “the

‘son.’” 314 “I have washed myself in this water in which Thoth bathed when he

officiated as vizier of Horus. I have anointed

myself with âga-oil; (then) I put on my ḏs ḏs garment, and took my ames-staff (of office)

in my hand. ”315 The last preparation of the dead “before being received into heaven”

was when the “body was attired in one or

more garments. ”316 To be received into heaven is the equivalent ritually of being

received into the temple. An instructive

sequence is shown from the temple of

Karnak in which the king (Ramses II) is first

drenched with water from head to foot, then

clothed with a shirt and headcloth, and then

“quietly stands waiting” in a scene

designated by the inscription as “the putting

on of the apron ( Anlegen der Schendot)”;

next he is seen sitting on a chair or throne,

washing his hands in a basin, and finally we

see him entering the temple from what is

called the pr-dwȝ.t or “royal temple

wardrobe,” where the clothing ceremonies

have taken place. 317 It is significant that in the washing scenes the subject was shown

fully clothed for reasons of piety and

modesty.318

Appearing “in one’s proper form” is

another sign of victory: “Behold I have come

forth on this day in my true form ( ỉrw) of a living ba; I have brought mine enemies

bound, being perfect (i.e., successful,

victorious, vindicated, and justified) in the

court.” 319

Lines 56–57: “which you prepared while you were alive ( or having made preparation in life), thou passest the day (time) hale and

hearty, walking about and breathing

everywhere”

This appears in preference to an

alternative rendering, “thou spendest the

night in life, the day in health,” which

requires altering the sign grg, “to provide for, set in order, make preparation,” to read

sgr, “to spend the night, rest.” Though the second reading provides a neat rhetorical

antithesis, the first is the word actually

written in all the texts. Papyrus Louvre N.

3291 reads grg.n=k, indicating antecedent

action. The combination of ʿnḫ and snb (here rendered “hale and hearty”) recalls the royal

formula again: ʿnḫ, wḏȝ, snb. Preparation for the hereafter in this life and future bliss as

the reward of such farsightedness is a theme

known to the Egyptians. Thus the dead

claims the protection of Horus in the next

world because “(I) have done his will.” 320

The initiate constantly reminds us that he

enters the testing well “equipped.”

Figure 112. At the top of the Metternich Stela and under the overarching symbol of heaven, Thoth draws our attention and worship to the symbol of supreme glory, the noonday sun over a compound ideogram for

the watery expanse. Between them and dominating the scene are the upraised arms of the ka, the highest expression of immortality. Ca. 350 B.C. Redrawing; original located at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.

The awakening of the dead in the manner

of a king in his pyramid (lines 57–58) has

been treated above.321

Possessor of the Royal Ka

Line 58: “It is Amon-Re who causeth thy ka

[ JSP adds: living, protecting, or prospering]

to live. It is [ JSP adds: in or by] the Book of Breathings that causeth thee to flourish

(maketh thee to prosper).”

The theme continues since Amon-Re is the

sun over all the earth. Life and health were

mentioned together in the preceding line,

recalling the well-known royal salutation of

“life, prosperity, health!” Here life ( ʿnḫ) and prosperity ( wḏȝ) are paired, suggesting the

same royal theme. This is confirmed in this

passage by the only reference in the entire

Book of Breathings to the ka, another sign of royalty (fig. 112; see p. 186, fig. 50).

Figure 113. The worshipper brings fire and water to the ka of Osiris. P. Sutimes (BD 105), ca. 1250 B.C.

After Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, pl.

CXVII.

John Wilson insists that only the king had a

ka in the early period and that in the Old Kingdom “a noble’s ka may have been the

pharaoh or a specific god.” 322 Down through the years, all sorts of definitions have been

given for the ka. Peter Renouf saw in it a

Doppelgänger. 323 In 1915 Alice Grenfell collected thirteen expert opinions on the

subject. 324 Georg Steindorff called it a

“Schutzgeist” and a man’s “Genius” ;325

Adolf Erman concluded that it was a

“special life power” ;326 Henri Sottas noted that while every man has a ka after death, only Pharaoh had one during life. 327 Moret discovered that the serdab chamber with its

two eerie eyes was really “the house of the

kȝ. ” 328 Eugène Lefébure, with whom Jacques de Horrack agreed, compared it to “the

fluidic doubles seen by the hypnotised

subject.” 329 The Egyptians had the power to see “the astral double, or Ka of the material

body. ”330 Grenfell notes appreciatively that Gaston Maspero compared the ka to

Paracelsus’s Evestrum. 331 Later Aylward Blackman pointed out that the water used in

the Opening of the Mouth purifications “is

identified with the god’s ka [fig. 113] … and

… the primeval water Nun” —the birth

waters of the placenta ka; 332 Blackman also showed how the smoke of incense was

thought to unite the king’s ka with the ka s of four gods.333 N. W. Thomas traced the ka to the African kla, “an image, or an imaginary being” that is “closely bound” to a person. 334

Moret suggested its origin in the ensign of a

tribe, the name of a king, a protective genie,

a source of life from which kings issue and

to which they return, and the nourishment that

sustains the universe. 335 Wilhelm Bayer found in Horus “the ka of the sun,” “the ka of the winged sun,” 336 the ka being specifically the power of the sun but as such not

identified with Horus.337 After 1920 ka research died down for a time until, in 1944,

Jean Delpech-Laborie compared the ka to

“the human aura.” 338 Jacques Pirenne

explains that everyone has a ka and a ba and that by retaining or reuniting the two one can

rejoin the company of the gods as an akh, or glorified spirit. 339 According to Žabkar, “the heart is said to be man’s Ka,” while ka, ba, and akh are all “modes of existence” which

“represent the man himself. … Perhaps we

can describe these manifestations as

‘multiple personalities’ or even better

‘multiple impersonations.’” 340 T. G. Allen renders “ka as ‘spirit,’ ba as ‘soul,’ [and]

akh as ‘the blessed one.’” 341 Thausing posits that while the ba flies to heaven, the ka is a diesseitige Seele, supplying strength and vitality for life here below. 342 In Reymond’s system of endless cycles of creation, “the

deceased Earth-God” was the ka, and his

realm was the place of origin for a new

creation;343 hence “the revivification of the Home of the Ka marks the starting point in

the creation of a new type of sacred abode:

the temple.” 344 Alexandre Piankoff again identified the heart with the ka in the role of

“the protective genie of the dead.” 345

Line 58: “It is [ JSP adds: in or by] the Book of Breathings that causeth thee to flourish ( or the Certificate of Breathing(s) maketh thee to

prosper)”

“Prosper” is the usual rendering of wḏȝ,

though it smacks too much of the business

world to apply here; a better expression

would be “makes vigorous.” In place of just

two elements of the royal greeting formula,

life and prosperity, to match the “life and

health” in the preceding line, the Joseph

Smith text here gives us the full formula: ʿnḫ, wḏȝ, snb! Also it is apparent that swḏȝ here is meant to indicate the flourishing of all

nature since the word šʿy, “book,” is written quite phonetically but also symbolically, not

with the pond ( š) sign, but with the marsh or

field ( šȝ) sign. Faulkner renders the expression swḏȝ tw ỉb, “make thy heart

flourish,” as meaning properly “inform

yourself! ”346

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 59–

61

59. Thou art following Osiris, a Horus,

Lord of the Ḥenu-ship ( or of jubilations), being as a great god at the head of ( or

among) the gods. Thy [ P. Louvre N. 3284

omits “thy” ] countenance liveth;

beautiful ( or perfect) is 60. thy form ( or are thine offspring); thy name shall be firmly established ( or

flourish) henceforward (every day).

Come to [ other manuscripts, including

JSP, have: enter into the gods’ [domain]]

the exalted ( or twice great) temple in Busiris to see the Chief of the

Westerners

61. at the wag-festival. Pleasant is thine odor as of the venerated ones [ JSP: as or among the young men]; great is thy name

among the [ JSP adds: very] elect (dignitaries, blessed dead, mummies [ the

determinative is doubled in the JSP]).

Commentary

Admission to the Company of the

Gods, the Elect Society

He enters the highest society. Having been

recognized as a king by the official greetings

and the possession of a ka, only one higher state remains for the initiate, and that is full

recognition of divinity.

Line 59: “Thou art following Osiris, a Horus, Lord of the Ḥenu-ship ( or of jubilations), being as a great god at the head

of ( or among) the gods”

It is permissible to say that the candidate

has now become a follower of Osiris and Horus, but Spiegel notes that when he

reverses his course and definitely turns his

face to the realms above, the initiate changes

his name from Osiris to Horus: as one who

has followed Osiris as “an Osiris,” he now

becomes a Horus—an Osiris youthful and

reborn (fig. 114). 347 On the other hand, Leonard Lesko notes that in some Pyramid

Texts the king is addressed as Horus “in the

passage leading into the antechamber” but

“as Osiris after he has ascended to the sky in

the texts of the inner chambers. ”348 In either case he lays claim to being the king of the

gods. This theme is developed at length in

the Second Book of Breathings.

Figure 114. The inscription has the subject entering into the council of the gods, here represented by the four sons of Horus holding was- scepters of supreme authority. P. Turin 1791 (BD 124), ca. 150 B.C.

Courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

In the Papyrus of Ani: “In very truth I am

Re himself. … I am thy son, O great one. I

have seen the hidden things which are thine. I

am crowned upon thy throne as ( or like) the king of the gods. I shall not die a second

death in ẖr.t-nṯr. ”349 Paul Barguet explains the situation: “From the Osiris which he was

yesterday, the dead has become Re, having

been preserved from destruction. … This

polyvalence … makes the dead sometimes

an Osiris, sometimes a Re, … while he still

remains himself”; however strange it may

appear to us, it is “one of the distinguishing features of Egyptian funerary literature.” 350

The final glory is not to become Re,

according to the Book of Two Ways, but for

the dead to spend “millions of years between

Re and Osiris,” after which “they will all sit

together in one place, with Re as the

supreme god.” 351 The expression “as the great god ( m nṯr ʿȝ)” can mean that one is to be regarded either like the god or as the god

—that is, either resembling him or

functioning in his capacity or both,352 in which case, holding the office, one is the great god, just as one is the king if one holds that office. As the coronation makes the king,

so the ordinances make the god; the

Egyptians believed that the king acquired his

divinity by virtue of the ordinance of

coronation.353 Frankfort held, on the other hand, that ordinances did not bestow divinity

but merely made manifest the divinity the

king already possessed; this, however, leaves him in a quandary, in which the

divinity of Pharaoh is “the ultimate paradox”

of the Egyptian doctrine of kingship. 354 It is not a paradox if one views the divine

kingship as an office bestowed by

ordinances. Hornung maintains that Pharaoh

did not hold office as a god, but as a

“witness of the active power of the creator-

god in this world. ”355 Moret found the coronation to be the key to Pharaoh’s

divinity: “The enthronement is hence already

a sacred service in which the gods offer and

the king receives cultic devotion, that is to

say, divinity. ”356 He notes that Pharaoh was worshiped at his coronation and the sed-

festival (which renewed his coronation), at

other festivals (which repeat the sed motifs), every day in the temple, and at his funeral; 357

but one may well ask whether this worship is

not the recognition, rather than the bestowal,

of divinity. What is the difference?

Throughout the ancient world, acclamation

recognized kingship and divinity and thereby

bestowed it, so that to withhold such

acclamation was to undermine and even

destroy the authority of the man on the

throne.358 Gloria is not an innate quality but the state of being exalted by an act of joyful

and general acclamation. It is the

acclamation that bestows the gloria by proclaiming it. 359

The baffling problems of identity in

Egyptian religion, as in Jewish and Christian

religions, largely disappear if we recognize

that immortality is an absolute quantity. To

be immortal is to share the essence of

divinity. To be “a very truly perfect spirit

who can never die” is to be inferior to no

god, to be “more glorious than Osiris.” 360 To be a member of the royal family is to be

royal as the king himself is royal; to be in the

family of the gods is to be divine as the highest god is divine, 361 just as a thing is either alive or not alive, with nothing in

between, or as in the military one is either an

officer or not an officer, so one either

qualifies for divinity or one does not. The

knowledge that one is indestructible is a full

recognition of divinity; rank and degree

become mere quibbles once all things

become possible. Chapter 43 of the Book of

the Dead is to enable one “to become as a

god,” and the text begins, “I am the oldest,

Son of the Great One, the Burning One, the

Son of the Burning One. … I am exalted, I

am renewed, I am rejuvenated, I am Osiris!”

Which is to say, as Thausing explains in a

note, “I am fortunate ( glücklich), I am I, I am everything!” 362

Once the divinity of the king was

recognized as sonship, 363 identity with the king automatically gave one a claim on that

divinity. At the beginning of the Middle Kingdom, local princes, by imitating the

royal ordinances, put themselves in the place

of Pharaoh; and by the New Kingdom,

“everyman” was treated at his funeral like

Pharaoh—again, it was the ordinances that

made that possible.364

Ḥnw is written with a ship-determinative

in some of the manuscripts (e.g., the Papyri

Kerasher and Louvre N. 3291), but without it

in the Joseph Smith and de Horrack texts, in

which case the word may be read as hnw,

“ritual rejoicing” or “acclamation.” The bark

of a god was also a ḥnw-ship of rejoicing, 365

since the hnw is the gesture by which one

recognizes the arrival of a visiting deity (fig.

115; see p. 205, fig. 56). One performed the

“hnw-rite” by raising one arm to the square with the other arm held to the breast in a V-shape while almost touching the ground with

one knee.366

Figure 115. According to the inscription, this is how the blessed (ancestral) spirits ( bȝ.w) perform the hnw- rite when they greet Horakhty at his coming, and by so doing, they protect him and grant him “all protection, life, endurance, divine power, health, and joy.” Restored drawing from flanking pillars before burial chamber, tomb of Seti I, ca. 1290 B.C.

Lefébure, Les hypogées royaux de Thèbes 2.4: pl.

XXII .

Lines 59–60: “The [ JSP: thy] countenance (face) liveth; beautiful ( or perfect, nfr) is thy form ( or are thine offspring); thy name shall be firmly established ( or flourish)

henceforward (continually, lit. every day)”

As far as supplying a comprehensible passage at this point, the Joseph Smith text is

the least troublesome of the various Books of

Breathings. It reads: ʿnḫ ḥr=k nfr ms.t=k

rn=k rwd rʿ nb. In other manuscripts both

“face” and “form” are followed by the

ideogram for “offspring.” Moreover, the

word for “form” should be msw.t, 367 which is not found in any of the texts; instead, we have ms, with the abbreviated sign of the woman bearing a child and, except in the

Joseph Smith Papyrus, plural strokes. 368 This gives preference to “offspring,” which also

suits the context; it is precisely the words

used here— ḥr (face), ms (offspring), rwd (flourish), and nfr (fair, young) followed by rʿ nb, “every day” —which indicate

perpetual freshness and renewal.369 De Horrack renders the passage “Ton beau

visage vit (dans) tes enfants (Thy beautiful

face liveth in thy children). ”370

This section deals with the social life of the candidate in the hereafter. He is in the

following of Osiris, among the great gods,

feasting amidst the Westerners, sharing the

company of the elect, and so we would

expect him to be concerned with his face and

his form as they are reflected in others—

naturally, his posterity. That is certainly

indicated by the unusual insertion of the

“offspring” ideogram after “face,” and the

shared aroma in the following line.

Lines 60–61: “Come to the exalted ( or twice great) temple in Busiris to see the

Chief of the Westerners at the wag-festival”

The wag-festival belonged to the New

Year complex of events, falling on “the first

day of the month, the first day of the half-

month, the first day of every week” 371—a celebration of beginning and ending, “the

festival of the coming forth of every god

( prw nṯr nb) at the wag-festival, … at the end of thy years.” 372 It took place when Sirius-Sothis-Isis rose with the sun in the

“dog days,” 373 and, as a year-rite, was dominated by Re. 374 It was the culminating action of the mysteries of Abydos,375

celebrating the last and highest step in the

assumption of divine power, establishing the

name of the king forever; 376 then it was that the king was proclaimed as the one “whose

office abides, whose dominion endures as

the Lord of Remembrance in heaven and on

earth, to whom hymns are sung at the wag-

festival in both lands. ”377 In the Kerasher Book of Breathings, at this point the subject

is invited to “enter his temple.” The three- or

four-day celebration was marked by gaiety at

all the great archaic shrines at the same time

—Letopolis, Buto (Pe and Dep), Rostau (the

Memphite cemetery), and especially

Busiris;378 it was a happy affair at which Osiris was hailed as “the lord of wine” as he

arrived in his ship.379 In Papyrus Westcar, wag seems to mean “shouting for joy. ”380

Line 61: “Pleasant is thine odor as of the venerated ones (dignitaries, or as or among the young men); great is thy name among the

elect”

This affirms the party atmosphere of the

wag- festival. Some of the manuscripts,

including the Joseph Smith Papyrus, have the

candidate smelling m ḥwn.w, “as youths,” or

“among the young men,” while others,

including the de Horrack version, give him

the odor of sanctity mỉ ỉmȝḫ.w, “like the

venerated ones.” Both ideas are found in the

funeral texts. The life-giving sweetness is

alike the odor of eternal youth and of the imperishable exalted ones: “They place life

and pleasure to his nose, and cause his

(heart) to rejoice with the fragrance of the ỉbr-ointment, … [and] supply the king with

‘the odor of the great ones.’” 381 Anubis heralds the approach of Ani as one who

belongs to the society of the exalted ones:

“When I smell his ‘odor it is even as the

odor of one of you.’” 382 In the Pyramid Texts, the incense and perfume expended on

the dead to revive him in the Opening of the

Mouth is called “the odor of the youth of

Upper Egypt, who has come from Nubia; he

gives to thee the incense with which the gods

are perfumed.” 383 The “young man” in question may be identified with Wsỉr ḥwn,

“Osiris the youth” or “Osiris the

renewed, ”384 of whom it is said, “the smell of thy limbs is as Punt; the venerable women

adore thee,” 385 combining the motifs of youth and venerable society. At the Sokar-rites, the

risen Osiris is hailed: “O god whose

perfume is agreeable. ”386 The adoration by

the Two Ladies is a love song or epithalamium for a youthful bridegroom—a

reminder that the mother of Hatshepsut, on

the night of mating with the god, was

awakened by the powerful sweetness that

breathed from him.387 Even in the funerary situation, sweet odors are more than a

countermeasure against the decay of death;

they are life-giving. The purpose of the

unguent and incense in the Opening of the

Mouth is “to make him smell sweet, ”388 the air of revival being laden with a

supernatural sweetness, as in early Christian

resurrection stories. Two things in particular

denote the presence of divinity in Egypt,

according to Hornung: Glanz (brilliance,

radiance, light) and Duft (fragrance, sweet aroma, “Gottesozon”); he notes that there

was a special ointment called

“Horusduft,” 389 youth being ever a prime aspect of Horus. The sweet odor of Horus is

inseparable from the idea of snsn, both as resurrecting and uniting through its suffusive

embrace.390

“Great is thy name among the elect,”

continues the theme. The same combination

is found in the Coffin Texts: “The company

on the horizon are delighted to see thee

approaching in state. … Anubis gives thee an

agreeable odor in thy house,” etc. 391

High social standing is the theme; one is

initiated into the ordinances in order to be

ready to join the company of the elect in the

next world, 392 an idea expressed in various ways by the word snsn. 393 “He who receives these purifications belongs from that time on

to the divine race.” 394 In this section, the candidate is declared fit for the highest

society, acceptable both as an altogether

pleasant and proper person and as one of

proper name and status.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 62–

65

62. Hail, Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr

[ JSP: Hor], Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-

63 (3/20). tȝ.wy, Justified! Thy ba lives by the Book of Breathings, thou unitest with

the same ( lit. likewise [ JSP has: [thou unitest with] a ba]). Thou enterest ( or Enter thou! ) into the duat;

64. thine enemies do not exist, for thou art

a deified ba in Busiris. Thy heart is thine own, never to be separated from thee.

65. Thou hast thy two eyes, open always

(every day).

Commentary

Having All Faculties Restored

Forever

Lines 62–63: “Hail, Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty- tȝ.wy,

Justified! Thy ba lives by the Book of Breathings, thou unitest with the same

(likewise [ JSP has: [thou unitest with] a ba])”

Both the Joseph Smith Papyrus and

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 are here defective;

the former has ba and the latter “thou

joinest” and “likewise” —hence, “you have

joined the ba by the same means,” referring to the book.395 Papyrus Louvre N. 3291 has

“thy ba lives by the B[ook] of B[reathings]

(because) thou art provided (endowed) with

( ḥnm=k m) a B[ook] of B[reathings]. ”396

The book has saved his life by giving him the

answers and instructions necessary to pass

all the tests, which are specifically listed in

the next section (see p. 328, fig. 101). The

Joseph Smith text differs from all the others

here; the word written is not ba but sa,

“son,” and the word that follows is not ʿq=k,

“thou enterest,” but ʿn=k, “thou returnest.”

This reading is supported by the Second Book of Breathings: “I am your Lord, the son

of your lord. … I have returned on (from)

earth; I have traveled in the duat.” 397 The scribe is apparently confused. Since this is

the final step of the initiation, it may be

significant that the candidate, upon reaching

this stage, bears only one title and only one

name, “the son” being both.

With the candidate proclaimed as a living

ba, the ordinances have reached a successful conclusion: “The foundation of the entire

resurrection ritual is the establishing of

complete identity between the dead and his

ba.” 398 The “living ba” is an expression denoting the highest form of immortality. 399

Lines 63–64: “Thou enterest ( or that thou mayest enter—a virtual result clause) into

the duat; thine enemies do not exist, for thou art a deified ba in Busiris”

Everything in this section shows that the operation is being brought to triumphant

conclusion. The duat can be either the duat above or that below.400 “Salvation,” said Joseph Smith, “is nothing more nor less than

to triumph over all our enemies and put them

under our feet.” 401 The word used in the Joseph Smith Papyrus for “enemies,” ḫfty.w, means rival, opponent, counteragent, i.e., the adversary.402 Every sinner, according to the Egyptian view, has put himself in the power

of the adversary, making himself a voluntary

follower of Seth and, as such, guilty of the

murder of Osiris; since sin is essentially

rebellion against the order of things, all sins

are alike in nature, differing only in

degree. 403

The Joseph Smith manuscript is unique in

declaring that the candidate returns to the

duat as a sanctified akh, while the other versions say that he enters the duat as a ba.

Here the Joseph Smith text is again vindicated by Papyrus Louvre N. 3279 Book

of Breathings: “I have returned to earth, I

have passed through the underworld … as an

august (noble) akh.” 404 This is the only time the important word akh ( ȝḫ) appears in the Book of Breathings, 405 and it gives a high mark to the Joseph Smith manuscript since it

is entirely proper to the final state of

advancement achieved by the initiate. Wilson

has examined the akh at some length and

refers all its functions back to the original

meaning of the word—“beneficial,

advantageous, glorious,” the root meaning

being that of “useful efficiency”:406 “An akh

[is] both a ‘being of glory’ and a continuingly

‘effective personality.’”407 While Grenfell identified no less than nine distinct parts of a

deceased person, 408 Žabkar has gone to the other extreme, holding “that the ancient

Egyptians had a monistic concept of man …

[who] was not a composite of body and soul,” existing forever “as a physical

corporality,” the well-known composite

parts being really “various forms or modes

of existence … akh, ka, ba, heart, shadow,

name, mummified body”; each form having

its purpose, though “the highest degree of

effectiveness was achieved when several of

these forms were combined.” 409 In the long Book of Breathings, the vital possessions are

deliberately distributed: “Your ba is in

heaven in the presence of Re; your ka is the divine image ( ẖnt) of the gods; your body is safely bestowed in the presence of Osiris;

your mummy is glorified ( ȝḫ.w) in the

presence of the living; your inheritance is

safe in the charge of Geb (the earth); your

heir is among the living; your name is

established by this Book of Living in

Eternity.” 410 It is precisely this highly desirable combination of forms that we meet

in this closing section of our Breathings text.

Whatever its nature, the akh is always

mentioned on the highest level of being.

According to Hornung, what lives forever is

the ba plus the “shadow” united in “a

glorified body,” into the physical nature of

which the corpse itself has been absorbed,

the whole making a single glorious akh. 411

Thus the akh is the resurrected and glorified body in the fullest sense. To follow

Thausing, while the ba is the entity that is aware and known, the akh is something still higher, being the “principle of illumination

and its objectivation, hence the Enlightened

One.” 412 Louis Speleers notes that though the akh “is conceived as a body, subject to the limitations of space and time,” it is never

represented as a human figure;413 for while the physical reality of the akh and its total identity with the individual is clearly

understood, the akh now exists on such a

high plane that to represent it as only human would be misleading—the main thing about

it is its fulness of glory, and that can best be

conveyed by the sign of the crested glory-

bird. The akh is the individual “playing his role among the gods,” while his other forms

all denote particular and lower functions.

Speleers aptly illustrates the idea by a

quotation from St. Augustine: “It is called

anima when it lives ( vegetat); spiritus when it contemplates; sense when it feels and

senses; animus when it knows ( sapit); mens when it comprehends ( intelligit); when it

discourses, it is reason; when it records, it is

memory.” 414

According to Reinhard Grieshammer,

failure to make the grade of akh amounts to the mysterious Egyptian “second death,” 415 a term that Zandee does not hesitate to relate to

its use in the book of Revelation.416 This makes akh the antithesis of mt, “dead,” 417

which, however, Hornung would translate as

“damned” rather than “dead,” 418 defining the

“second death” not as nonexistence or

eternal punishment, but as “annihilation” in

the sense of being forever incapacitated “as

an opponent of the eternal order of the

cosmos.” 419 The ultimate damnation for the Egyptian was to be deprived of identity and

freedom to move about, having no claim to

renewal in the cosmic cycle of things. 420

Hence the supreme blessing of the Amduat is

that he who knows the text of the third hour

will complete his journey, become an akh,

and go forth “breathing air in his hour. ”421

As the very highest exaltation, the status of

akh imparts the right to be a judge. 422 From all of this it is clear that the Joseph Smith

Papyrus at this point shows superior insight

to the others in ending on this high and joyful

note. Compare Papyrus Louvre N. 3279: “as

an august akh, … Re-Horakhty is my name. I

am the god, lord of the duat. I am Re, come forth from the horizon, justified like the lord

of the wrr.t- crown.” 423

Figure 116. The man is being given possession of his heart. P. Turin 1791 (BD 28), ca. 150 B.C. Courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

Figure 117. The man receives his heart. According to the Story of the Two Brothers, the heart can be

revived by being placed in cold water in a jar. BD 26.

After Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, pl.

XXXVII.

Lines 64–65: “Thy heart is thine own, never to be separated from thee. Thou hast thy two

eyes”

“O my heart, I am thy lord, do not go far

from me ever!” 424 “My heart will not be taken away from me by the combatants of

Heliopolis, (for) I am he before whom Atum

made thine annals beneath the noble ished-

tree at Heliopolis … when the light was

placed within my two eyes, so as to walk by

night as well as day, so as to see his rays

every day.” 425

Goyon finds the final possession of the

heart (fig. 116) to be the main theme of

Papyrus Louvre N. 3279 of the Second Book

of Breathings, identifying it closely with the

Memphite rather than the Theban theology. 426

In the Memphite theology, as in this Second

Book of Breathings, the doctrine of creation

by the heart and the tongue is the same. The

heart is necessary both for judgment and for

life (fig. 117). 427 In this text, “Atum, the Word of Ptah incarnate under divine form, is

truly the god to invoke”; hence “the dead is

assimilated to Horus as the direct issue of

Ptah.” It is Ptah as creator who effects the

Opening of the Mouth, which in the

Memphite theology means, before all else,

the restoration of the heart. 428 Papyrus Louvre N. 3279 harps persistently on the

theme: “Thou givest to me my mouth (that) I

may speak with it. … Thou guidest for me

my heart in the moment of peril” ;429 “Thou makest for me a heart in the House of Hearts,

a ḥȝty (cardiac muscle, according to

Goyon)430 in the ḥȝty-house. Make for me a heart firm in its place ( or on its throne), a ḥȝty in its proper position! ”431 Our Breathings text uses ỉb, the “psychical term”

for heart, as opposed to ḥȝty, a more

physiological designation, though in the later

period the distinction does not always

hold. 432 The heart brings about “the unity of sensibility, of intellect, and of action” ;433 the function of all the senses originates in the

heart, which represents “the totality of life

and … of the essence and personality of

every being.” 434 For the Egyptian “the heart is the core ( Kern) of a man and the bearer of his individual nature. … It was the entire

personality; hence for it to ‘leave its place’

could only mean helplessness or death. ”435

“To have power over one’s heart” is to have

complete mastery of all functions of the

body. 436 In particular, the heart was the organ of breathing, foreign as the idea is to our way of understanding. 437

Notes

1. Joachim Spiegel, Das Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1971), 7, 45, 63.

2. Gertrud Thausing, Sein und Werden: Versuch einer Ganzheitsschau der Religion des Pharaonenreiches (Vienna: Stiglmayr, 1971), 172.

3. Spiegel, Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 85.

4. Siegfried Morenz, Ägyptische Religion (Stuttgart: Kohkhammer, 1960), 269–72.

5. Walter Federn, “The ‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts: A New Approach,” JNES 19 (1960): 246.

6. Eberhard Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue seit dem neuen Reich,” Or 17 (1948): 455–56.

7. Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue,”

464.

8. Wolfgang Helck, “Die Bedeutung der ägyptischen Besucherinschriften,” ZDMG 102 (1952): 46.

9. Henri Frankfort, The Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos (London: Egypt Exploration Society, 1933), 1:31.

10. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 221.

11. See the appendixes at the end of this book.

12. 2 Baruch 51:10, in APOT 2:509; cf. OTP 1:638.

13. “Livre d’Adam,” in J.-P. Migne, Dictionnaire des apocryphes (Paris: Migne, 1856–58), 1:261.

14. Cited in Marguérite Harl, “From Glory to Glory,” in Kyriakon: Festschrift Johannes Quasten, ed. Patrick Granfield and Josef A. Jungmann (Münster:

Aschendorff, 1970), 2:730; cf. 2 Corinthians 3:18.

15. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 269–72.

16. Hugh W. Nibley, “A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price,” IE, March 1970, 84–88, reprinted in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:319–28.

17. Bruno H. Stricker, “De Egyptische mysteriën: Pap.

Leiden T 32,” OMRO 37 (1956): 52.

18. Frankfort, Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, 1:68, emphasis added.

19. Hugh W. Nibley, “Evangelium Quadraginta Dierum,”

Vigiliae christianae 20 (1966): 9–10, reprinted in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:14–15.

20. Frankfort, Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, 1:26–31.

21. Frankfort, Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, 1:28.

22. Frankfort, Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, 1:38.

23. Frankfort, Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, 1:65.

24. Frankfort, Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, 1:39, 41–43.

25. Winfried Barta, “Zur Verteilung der 12 Nachtstunden des Amduat in Grabe Tuthmosis’ III,” JEOL 7/21 (1969–70): 165.

26. Barta, “Zur Verteilung der 12 Nachtstunden,” 168; cf. 1

Nephi 10:19; Alma 37:12; D&C 3:2.

27. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 125.

28. Gertrud Thausing and Traudl Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch (Papyrus Reinisch) der Papyrussammlung der Österreichischen

Nationalbibliothek (Cairo: Österreichisches Kulturinstituts, 1969), 6.

29. Rudolf Bultmann, “Die Bedeutung der neuerschlossenen mandäischen und manichäischen Quellen für das

Verständnis des Johannesevangeliums,” Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 24 (1925): 104.

30. Stricker, “De Egyptische mysteriën,” OMRO 34 (1953): 17; cf. Adolph Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrash (1853–77;

reprint, Jerusalem: Wahrmann, 1967), 2:38.

31. Joachim Spiegel, “Das Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” ASAE 53 (1956): 146–47, 413–14.

32. CT 75, in Adriaan de Buck, The Egyptian Coffin Texts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935–61),

1:398c; Jan Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 99

(1972): 60.

33. CT 97, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:91.

34. Erik Hornung, Das Amduat: Die Schrift des verborgenen Raumes (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1963–

67), 2:40.

35. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:27–29; 2:46–48.

36. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:29.

37. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:82, 86.

38. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:84; 2:90–91.

39. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:124–26.

40. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:128.

41. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:136.

42. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:138–40.

43. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:146–48.

44. Barta, “Zur Verteilung der 12 Nachtstunden,” 164.

45. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:56.

46. Leonard H. Lesko, The Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), 135.

47. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 75.

48. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 2.

49. Jean-Claude Goyon, Le Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279

(Cairo: IFAO, 1966), 82–85.

50. CT 148, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:213–14.

51. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:103–7; 1:90–95.

52. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:163–64.

53. John H. Crowe and Alan F. Cooper Jr., “Cryptobiosis,”

Scientific American, December 1971, 36.

54. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 72–73.

55. Julian Obermann, “Wind, Water, and Light in an Archaic Inscription from Shechem,” JBL 57 (1938): 249–50.

56. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 208–10, 221–23.

57. Theodor Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris (Prague: Orientalisches Institut, 1941), 1:69. For the meaning of duat, see above, commentary to line 18, pp.

202–3.

58. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, August 1969, 76.

59. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 17.

60. BD 182, in Edouard H. Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch der XVIII. bis XX. Dynastie: Einleitung (Berlin: Asher, 1886), 1: pl. CCVII; cf. The Eloquent Peasant, Bauer (Bl) (P. Berlin 3023) lines 303–7, in Adolf Erman, Literarische Texte des Mittleren Reiches (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1908–9), 1: Taf. 16–17a.

61. For which expression, see Siegfried Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schrifter,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 24, emphasis added.

62. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schrifter,” 22.

63. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schrifter,” 23.

64. Paul Barguet, Le Livre des Morts des anciens égyptiens (Paris: Cerf, 1967), 98, discussing BD 94–97.

65. S. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne: Compléments à la religion égyptienne (Athens: BAOA, 1957), 162–63.

66. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 166.

67. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 167.

68. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 168–69.

69. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 170.

70. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 171–73.

71. For more on the ba, see above, commentary to line 3, pp. 112–16.

72. BD 125, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 32.

73. Gertrud Thausing, Der Auferstehungsgedanke in ägyptischen religiösen Texten (Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 1943), 186–88.

74. Kurt Sethe, Urgeschichte und älteste Religion der Ägypter (1930; reprint, Nendeln, Liecht.: Krauss, 1966), 135 §165.

75. Gustave Lefebvre, Le tombeau de Petosiris (Cairo: IFAO, 1923–24), 1:82–83, 102, 140.

76. Günther Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten

Ägypten (Jena: Diederichs, 1915), xxv.

77. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 13–14.

78. Alexandre Moret, Du caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 102 and fig. 18; Richard Lepsius, Denkmäler aus Ägypten und

Äthiopien (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1897–1913), 3:55–56.

79. Edouard H. Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch der XVIII. bis XX. Dynastie: Einleitung (Berlin: Asher, 1886), 25–26.

80. Francis Ll. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests at Memphis: The Sethon of Herodotus and the Demotic Tales of Khamuas (Oxford: Clarendon, 1900), 16.

81. P. Setna I 4/1–3, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 104–5.

82. P. Setna I 5/13–14, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests, 186–87.

83. Jan Bergman, Ich bin Isis: Studien zum memphitischen Hintergrund der griechischen Isisaretalogien

(Uppsala: Berlingska, 1968), 222–23.

84. Eloquent Peasant, Bauer B1 (P. Berlin 3023), 303–5, in Erman, Literarische Texte des Mittleren Reiches, 1: Taf. 16–17a.

85. Louis V. Žabkar, “Some Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition of the Book of the Dead,” JNES 24 (1965): 84–

85.

86. Alexandre Piankoff, Le “coeur” dans les textes égyptiens (Paris: Geuthner, 1930), 54–55; Wilhelm

Spiegelberg, “Das Herz als zweites Wesen des Menschen,” ZÄS 66 (1931): 35–37.

87. P. Sensaos 20, in Bruno H. Stricker, “De Lijkspapyrus van Sensaos,” OMRO 23 (1942): 39.

88. Reinhard Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1970), 51–55.

89. PT 217 §§152–60, discussed in Spiegel,

“Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 362.

90. S. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire de l’anté-diluvien à Sumer-Babylone: La familiarité divine originelle (Athens: BAOA, 1961), 93–94.

91. CT 103, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:109–10.

92. CT 165, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3:7–8.

93. Gaston Maspero, “Le nom antique de la Grande-Oasis et les idées qui s’y rattachent,” in Études de mythologie et d’archéologie égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 2

(Paris: Leroux, 1893), 2:425.

94. Wolfgang Helck, “Die Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” ArOr 20 (1952): 73–75.

95. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:37.

96. Henri Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods: A Study of Ancient Near Eastern Religion as the Integration of Society and Nature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948), 204.

97. Peter Munro, “Bemerkungen zu einem Sedfest-Relief in der Stadtmauer von Kairo,” ZÄS 86 (1961): 72.

98. PT 670 §1979; cf. Aylward M. Blackman, “Sacramental

Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” RT 39 (1921): 86.

99. Charles Autran, “Sothis-Sirius et le monde préhellénique,” MIFAO 66 (1935–38): 533.

100. PT 670 §1979; cf. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 88.

101. Max Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos: Ein Beitrag zur ägyptischen Religions- und Literaturgeschichte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929), 25 §15 line 18.

102. Munro, “Bemerkungen zu einem Sedfest-Relief,” 73.

103. Munro, “Bemerkungen zu einem Sedfest-Relief,” 65.

104. Munro, “Bemerkungen zu einem Sedfest-Relief,” 66–

67.

105. Munro, “Bemerkungen zu einem Sedfest-Relief,” 69.

106. Eberhard Otto, “Sprüche auf altägyptischen Särgen,”

ZDMG 102 (1952): 198.

107. Autran, “Sothis-Sirius et le monde préhellénique,” 533.

108. Claas J. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals: Enactments of Religious Renewal (Leiden: Brill, 1967), 104–5.

109. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:48–49.

110. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:20.

111. Helck, “Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” 72–

73, 82–83.

112. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 120.

113. CT 129, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:150.

114. CT 130, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:150.

115. CT 10, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:34.

116. Eloquent Peasant, Bauer (B1) (P. Berlin 3023), 63–68, in Erman, Literarische Texte des Mittleren Reiches, 1: Taf. 7–7a.

117. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 85.

118. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:386.

119. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 65.

120. Klaus Baer, “The Breathing Permit of Hôr: A Translation of the Apparent Source of the Book of

Abraham,” Dialogue 3/3 (1968): 122.

121. Philippe-Jacques de Horrack, “Le Livre des Respirations d’après les manuscrits du Musée du

Louvre,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Philippe Virey and Gaston Maspero, BE 17 (Paris: Leroux, 1907), 122.

122. P. Berlin 3135 2/14, in Georg Möller, Hieratische Paläographie (Leipzig: Hinrich, 1927–36), 3: Taf. XI.

123. Eberhard Otto, Gott und Mensch nach den ägyptischen Tempelinschriften der griechisch-römischen Zeit: Eine Untersuchungen zur

Phraseologie der Tempelinschriften (Heidelberg: Winter, 1964), 24.

124. Alexandre Moret, Le rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 142–43.

125. Hans Bonnet, Reallexikon der ägyptischen Religionsgeschichte, 2nd ed. (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971), 433.

126. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 141–44, 165; Alexandre Moret, Mystères égyptiens

(Paris: Colin, 1913), 133–34; Bernhard Grdseloff,

“L’insigne du grand juge égyptien,” ASAE 40 (1940): 191.

127. Étienne Drioton, “Deux cryptogrammes de Senenmout,” ASAE 38 (1938): 236, emphasis in original.

128. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 431.

129. Claas J. Bleeker, “The Pattern of the Ancient Egyptian Culture,” Numen 11 (1964): 79.

130. Hellmut Brunner, “Zum Verständnis des Spruches 312

der Sargtexte,” ZDMG 111 (1961): 445.

131. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride (Of Isis and Osiris) 31.

132. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Dead: The Papyrus of Ani, Scribe and Treasurer of the Temples of Egypt, About B.C. 1450 (New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1913), 2:555; 3: pl. 28.

133. Oswald Lassally, “Amulette und Tätowierungen in Ägypten,” Archiv für Religionswissenschaft 29 (1931): 136.

134. Julien Tondriau, “Tatouage, lierre et syncrétismes,”

Aegyptus 30 (1950): 57–58.

135. André Wilmart and Eugène Tisserant, “Fragments grecs et latins de l’Évangile de Barthélemy,” Revue biblique, n.s., 10 (1913): 361; see also 360.

136. L. Saint-Paul Girard, “Un fragment de liturgie magique copte sur ostrakon,” ASAE 27 (1927): 63, 68, see also 62.

137. Baer, “Breathing Permit of Hôr,” 122 n. 64.

[Punctuation modified for ease of comprehension—eds.]

138. E. A. Wallace Budge, The Book of the Dead: Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, A.nhai,

Kerāsher and Netchemet (London: British Museum, 1899), Kerāsher section, pl. 2 and p. 41.

139. P. Bremner-Rhind 26/2–3, in Raymond O. Faulkner, The Papyrus Bremner-Rhind (British Museum No.

10188) (Brussels: FERE, 1933), 56.

140. Grdseloff, “L’insigne du grand juge égyptien,” 185–202; Ridolfo V. Lanzone, Dizionario di mitologia egizia (Turin: Doyen, 1881–85), 4: pl. 109.1–3.

141. Alexandre Piankoff, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon (New York: Pantheon, 1955), 32–33; Book of Two

Ways, 7 line 15, in Hans Schack-Schackenburg, Das Buch von den zwei Wegen des seligen Toten

(Zweiwegebuch) (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1903), 28.

142. Gabriele Giamberardini, “La croce e il crocifisso presso i copti,” Studia Orientalia Christiana 7 (1962): 50–51.

143. Ludwig Keimer, Remarques sur le tatouage dans l’Égypte ancienne (Cairo: IFAO, 1948), 64–67; H. R.

Hall, “The Bronze Statuette of Khonserdaisu in the British Museum,” JEA 16 (1930): 1; Jean Yoyotte, “Le dénommé Mosou,” BIFAO 57 (1958): 81 n. 2; all cited in Erich Winter, “Eine ägyptische Bronze aus Ephesos,”

ZÄS 97 (1971): 151 and nn. 30–32; see also Winter’s fig.

11.

144. Schack-Schackenburg, Buch von den zwei Wegen, 8.

145. Herbert W. Fairman, “The Myth of Horus at Edfu—I,”

JEA 21 (1935): 27–36.

146. Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos, 4.

147. Selim Bey Hassan, “A Representation of the Solar Disk with Human Hands and Arms and the Form of Horus of Beḥdet, as Seen on the Stela of Amenhetep IInd in the Mud-Brick Temple at Giza,” ASAE 38 (1938): 55.

148. On his ferocity, see Jules Baillet, “L’anthropophagie dans l’Égypte primitive,” BIFAO 30 (1931): 67.

149. Compare P. Salt 825 8/2, in Philippe Derchain, Le Papyrus Salt 825 (B. M. 10051): Rituel pour la conservation de la vie en Égypte (Brussels: Palais des Académies, 1965), 2:10*: “Shu is making wind(s) for the nose of his son Osiris, to drive off his enemies.”

150. George Daressy, “Notes et remarques,” RT 24 (1902): 164; Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 148–49.

151. Maxence de Rochemonteix, “Le temple d’Apet, où est engendré l’Osiris de Thèbes,” RT 6 (1885): 32.

152. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 149.

153. Winfried Barta, “Der Königsring als Symbol zyklischer Wiederkehr,” ZÄS 98 (1970): 16.

154. Erik Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971), 252; English trans. Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many, trans. John Baines (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1982), 256.

155. Hermann Kees, Der Götterglaube im alten Ägypten

(Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1941), 251–52.

156. E. A. Wallis Budge, Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection (New York: Dover, 1973), 2:129.

157. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:89.

158. P. Salt 825 14/9–10, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:16*.

159. Budge, Osiris, 2:129.

160. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 154–55.

161. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 155.

162. Kees, Der Götterglaube im alten Ägypten, 171.

163. P. Louvre N. 3129 C/5–6, in Siegfried Schott, Urkunden mythologischen Inhalts (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929), 9–11.

164. Adriaan de Buck, “On the Meaning of the Name Ḥʿpj,”

in Orientalia Neerlandica: A Volume of Oriental Studies (Leiden: Sijthoff’s Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V., 1948), 1.

165. De Buck, “On the Meaning of the Name Ḥʿpj,” 2.

166. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:19–20; Bernhard Grdseloff, “Nouvelles données concernant la tente de purification,” ASAE 51 (1951): 137–38.

167. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 52.

168. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 88.

169. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:175.

170. Étienne Drioton, “Le roi défunt, Thot et la crue du Nil,”

Egyptian Religion 1 (1933): 39–51.

171. Aylward M. Blackman, “The King of Egypt’s Grace

before Meat,” JEA 31 (1945): 58–61.

172. Hermann Kees, Ägypten (Tübingen: Mohr, 1928), 21.

173. Aylward M. Blackman, “Some Notes on the Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” JEA 5 (1918): 118.

174. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 43.

175. James H. Breasted, Ancient Records of Egypt (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1906–7), 2:68 no.

164.

176. Hermann Junker, Die Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien nach den Inschriften von Dendera, Edfu und Philae (Vienna: Hölder, 1910), 78–80.

177. László Kákosy, “Zu einer Etymologie von Philä: Die

‘Insel der Zeit,’” Acta Antiqua 16 (1968): 43.

178. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 52–53, 59.

179. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 302.

180. Wolfgang Helck, “Nilhöhe und Jubiläumsfest,” ZÄS 93

(1966): 78.

181. Blackman, “King of Egypt’s Grace before Meat,” 59.

182. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 46–48, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 50–53.

183. Otto, “Sprüche auf altägyptischen Särgen,” 194.

184. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 52 n. 2.

185. Otto, “Sprüche auf altägyptischen Särgen,” 196–97.

186. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 70.

187. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 50, 68–69.

188. De Buck, “On the Meaning of the Name Ḥʿpj,” 15.

189. Giamberardini, “Croce e il crocifisso presso i copti,”

67–69.

190. Baer, “Breathing Permit of Hôr,” 123.

191. Raymond O. Faulkner, A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1962), 45.

192. Wolfgang Helck, Die Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II. in Karnak (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1968), 1:9 (discussion of picture 6).

193. Helck, Die Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:11 (discussion of picture 8).

194. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 42–

45.

195. Munro, “Bemerkungen zu einem Sedfest-Relief,” 69.

196. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of Opening the Mouth (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1909), 1:226

(thirty-second ceremony).

197. E. A. E. Reymond, The Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1969), 13.

198. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 187.

199. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 200–210.

200. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:67, 174.

201. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 152.

202. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 158.

203. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 162–63.

204. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 164.

205. Corpus Hermeticum 7.2.

206. CT 36, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:135–40.

207. J. B. Frey, “La vie de l’au-delà dans les conceptions juives au temps de Jésus-Christ,” Biblica 13 (1932): 135.

208. George H. Box, The Apocalypse of Abraham (London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1919), vii–viii.

209. Pirqe Rabbi Eliezer 27, in Gerald Friedlander, Pirḳê de Rabbi Eliezer, 2nd ed. (New York: Hermon, 1965), 193 and n. 11.

210. Clementines recognitiones (Clementine Recognitions) 1.33, in PG 1:1227.

211. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:147–48.

212. Wilhelm Spiegelberg, “Zu Rȝ-śṯȝ.w,

‘Nekropolis,’”

ZÄS 59 (1924): 159.

213. Gaston Maspero, “Le Livre des Morts,” in Études de mythologie et d’archéologie égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 1 (Paris: Leroux, 1893), 325–87; cf.

Howard Carter and Alan H. Gardiner, “The Tomb of

Ramesses IV and the Turin Plan of a Royal Tomb,” JEA 4 (1917): 137.

214. Émile Amélineau, L’enfer égyptien et l’enfer

virgilien: Étude de mythologie comparée (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1914), 6.

215. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 99, discussing BD 117–19.

216. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:90.

217. Hermann Junker, “‘Handlung’ als Präfix in Zusammensetzungen,” ZÄS 77 (1941): 3–7.

218. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:90–91.

219. Schack-Schackenburg, Buch von den zwei Wegen, 13–15.

220. Baer, “Breathing Permit of Hôr,” 123 n. 70.

221. Short Amduat, fourth hour, lines 79–80, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:7–8.

222. Gaballa A. Gaballa and Kenneth A. Kitchen, “The Festival of Sokar,” Or 38 (1969): 69.

223. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 68.

224. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 250.

225. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 499.

226. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 267.

227. Jan Zandee, Death as an Enemy: According to Ancient Egyptian Conceptions, trans. Mrs. W. F.

Klasens (Leiden: Brill, 1960), 113.

228. Wilhelm Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” ZÄS 76 (1940): 20.

229. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 224; English trans., 228.

230. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 223; English trans.,

227.

231. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 225; English trans., 229.

232. Short Amduat, second hour, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:4–5.

233. Hans Bonnet, “Herkunft and Bedeutung der naophoren Statue,” MDAIK 17 (1961): 96; Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:8; 2:16.

234. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:7, 39; 2:15, 58.

235. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:8; 2:16.

236. Winfried Barta, review of Canopics, by George A.

Reisner, OLZ 66 (1971): 138.

237. P. Leiden T 32 8/1–3, in Stricker, “Egyptische Mysteriën,” OMRO 37 (1956): 59.

238. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, November 1969, 117, reprinted in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:188–89.

239. Alan H. Gardiner, Ancient Egyptian Onomastica (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1947), 2:176–78.

240. Reymond, Mythical Origins of the Egyptian Temple, 207.

241. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 128.

242. Wolfgang Helck, “Bemerkungen zum Ritual des Dramatischen Ramesseumspapyrus,” Or 23 (1954): 408–9.

243. Reymond, Mythical Origins of the Egyptian Temple, 123.

244. P. Bremner-Rhind 19/10–12, in Faulkner, Papyrus

Bremner-Rhind, 37.

245. Reymond, Mythical Origins of the Egyptian Temple, 111.

246. As in P. Salt 825 12/1–3, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:13*–14*.

247. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, July 1969, 104.

248. Wb 1:162; Piankoff, “Coeur” dans les textes égyptiens, 108.

249. Piankoff, “Coeur” dans les textes égyptiens, 108.

250. Adriaan de Buck, “Un chapitre de psychologie égyptienne,” CdE 21 (1946): 19–20.

251. Wb 4:567.

252. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, July 1969, 105–8.

253. Alan H. Gardiner, “Horus the Beḥdetite,” JEA 30

(1944): 59.

254. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 132.

255. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 2:182.

256. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 135.

257. Constant de Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,” CdE 36 (1961): 80–81.

258. Gardiner, “Horus the Beḥdetite,” 24–33, 46–47, 50; cf.

Nibley, “New Look,” IE, July 1969, 105–6.

259. Alexandre Piankoff, “Le Livre du Jour dans la tombe (no. 132) de Ramose,” ASAE 41 (1942): 151–58.

260. De Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,”

82.

261. De Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,”

91.

262. De Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,”

96–97.

263. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 274.

264. Baer, “Breathing Permit of Hôr,” 123 n. 76.

265. Reymond, Mythical Origins of the Egyptian Temple, 196–97, 133.

266. Baillet, “L’anthropophagie dans l’Égypte primitive,” 67.

267. P. Salt 825 6/5, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:7*.

268. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 122–26, 129–31.

269. P. Berlin 3135 2/24–25, in Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3: Taf. XI.

270. P. Berlin 3135 2/25, in Möller, Hieratische Paläographie, 3: Taf. XI.

271. Wb 2:107.

272. Aylward M. Blackman, review of Hieratic Papyri in the British Museum: Third Series: Chester Beatty Gift, by Alan H. Gardiner, JEA 22 (1936): 105.

273. Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 46.

274. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 92.

275. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 113.

276. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 150.

277. Helck, “Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” 78–

79.

278. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd rev. ed.

(Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1957), 239 §313.

279. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 368.

280. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 32–34, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 43–45.

281. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 49–50, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 51–54.

282. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 41–44, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 47–50.

283. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 49 n. 6.

284. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 367–

70.

285. Siegfried Morenz, “Das Problem des Werdens zu Osiris in der griechisch-römischen Zeit Ägyptens,” in REHR, 81.

286. Thausing, Auferstehungsgedanke, 20.

287. Morenz, “Problem des Werdens zu Osiris,” 81.

288. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 396.

289. Helck, “Bemerkungen zum Ritual,” 383–411.

290. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 194.

291. Helck, “Bemerkungen zum Ritual,” 411, quoted in Hartwig Altenmüller, “Zur Lesung und Deutung des

Dramatischen Ramesseumpapyrus,” JEOL 6/19 (1965–

66): 441.

292. See Nibley, “New Look,” IE, June 1969, 126–28.

293. Alan H. Gardiner, “The Coronation of King Ḥaremḥab,” JEA 39 (1953): 25–27.

294. Czermak, “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des

ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches,’” 18; Louis Speleers, “La résurrection et la toilette du mort selon les Textes des Pyramides,” RdE 3 (1938): 37.

295. Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 45.

296. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 230–33; cf. Polybius frg. in Theodor Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae (Bonn: Marcus and Weber, 1922), 775.

297. Gertrud Thausing, “Das ‘Aufhacken der Erde,’” Archiv für ägyptische Archäologie 1 (1938): 12.

298. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:368–70, 387–89.

299. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 389–

91; PT 256 §301.

300. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 392

n. 1.

301. Baer, “Breathing Permit of Hôr,” 123 n. 78.

302. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 603, emphasis added.

303. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 477, sign-list L2.

304. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 504, sign-list S3.

305. Hugh W. Nibley, “There Were Jaredites,” IE, April 1956, 244–45, reprinted in Lehi in the Desert; The World of the Jaredites; There Were Jaredites, CWHN

5:319–21; cf. 192.

306. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 106.

307. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 272.

308. Adriaan de Buck, De Egyptische Voorstellingen

betreffende den Oerheuvel (Leiden: Ijdo, 1922), 63.

309. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 101.

310. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 276, 295–96.

311. For more on washing, see above, commentary to line 10, pp. 140–44.

312. Speleers, “Résurrection et la toilette du mort,” 38.

313. Philippe Derchain, “La couronne de la justification: Essai d’analyse d’un rite ptolémaïque,” CdE 30 (1955): 249.

314. Eberhard Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1960), 2:11.

315. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 194, discussing BD 145.

316. Blackman, “Some Notes on the Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” 123.

317. Hermann Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” RT 36 (1914): 5.

318. Jean Capart, “À propos du cercueil d’argent du roi Chechonq,” CdE 18 (1943): 195.

319. CT 93, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:66; cf. CT

89 and 91, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:55, 63, where the trial or testing is at the gates of hell.

320. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 69.

321. See above, commentary, part 3, section on “The Temple as a Powerhouse,” pp. 264–77.

322. John A. Wilson, The Culture of Ancient Egypt (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957), 86.

323. Peter Le Page Renouf, “On the True Sense of an

Important Egyptian Word ( Ka),” in The Life-Work of Sir Peter Le Page Renouf, ed. Edouard Naville and W.

Harry Rylands (Paris: Leroux, 1902–5), 2:229–45.

324. Alice Grenfell, “The Ka on Scarabs,” RT 37 (1915): 77–78.

325. Georg Steindorff, “Der Ka und die Grabstatuen,” ZÄS

48 (1910): 152.

326. Adolf Erman, Die ägyptische Religion (Berlin: Reimer, 1905), 88.

327. Henri Sottas, “Contribution à l’étude de la notion du Ka égyptien,” Sphinx 17 (1913): 34–35.

328. Alexandre Moret, “Serdab et maison du Ka,” ZÄS 52

(1914): 88–89.

329. Grenfell, “The Ka on Scarabs,” 78.

330. Grenfell, “The Ka on Scarabs,” 78.

331. Grenfell, “The Ka on Scarabs,” 78–79.

332. Blackman, “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt,” 77.

333. Aylward M. Blackman, “‘The House of the Morning,’”

JEA 5 (1918): 157.

334. N. W. Thomas, “What Is the Ka? ” JEA 6 (1920): 272.

335. Alexandre Moret, Mystères égyptiens (Paris: Colin, 1913), 201–19.

336. Wilhelm Bayer, “Die Religion der ältesten ägyptischen Inschriften,” Anthropos 23 (1928): 514.

337. Bayer, “Die Religion der ältesten ägyptischen Inschriften,” 530–31.

338. Jean Delpech-Laborie, “L’aura humaine et le ka

égyptien,” CdE 19 (1944): 62–67.

339. Jacques Pirenne, “Âme et vie d’outre-tombe chez les égyptiens de l’Ancien Empire,” CdE 34 (1959): 208–13.

340. Žabkar, “Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition,” 85–86.

341. Cited in Žabkar, “Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition,” 85.

342. Gertrud Thausing, “Die Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im Ägyptischen,” in Mélanges Maspero, ed. Pierre Jouguet (Cairo: IFAO, 1935–38), 39.

343. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 198.

344. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 215.

345. Piankoff, “Coeur” dans les textes égyptiens, 54.

346. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 218.

347. Spiegel, Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 51–52.

348. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 5.

349. P. Ani 4–6, in Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:459; 3: pl. 16.

350. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 23.

351. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 129.

352. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 130; English trans., 140.

353. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 131–33; English trans., 141–42.

354. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 5.

355. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 133; English trans., 142.

356. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 210.

357. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 279.

358. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Hierocentric State,” Western Political Quarterly 4 (1951): 226–53, reprinted in The Ancient State: The Rulers and the Ruled, CWHN

10:99–147.

359. Hugh Nibley, “Victoriosa Loquacitas: The Rise of Rhetoric and the Decline of Everything Else,” Western Speech 20/2 (1956): 60, 67; reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN 10:247–48, 259.

360. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 121.

361. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 138; English trans., 146–48; for the old Jewish and Christian concept, cf. E.

Cherbonnier, “The Logic of Biblical Anthropomorphism,”

Harvard Theological Review 55 (1962): 198, 201, 205–

6.

362. Quoted in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 24; see also n. 3.

363. Jan Zandee, “Le roi-dieu et le dieu-roi dans l’Égypte ancienne,” Numen 3 (1956): 230–34; Jean Sainte Fare Garnot, Religions égyptiennes antiques:

Bibliographie analytique, 1939–43 (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1952), 123–78.

364. Erich Lüddeckens, “Untersuchungen über religiösen

Gehalt, Sprache und Form der ägyptischen Totenklagen,”

MDAIK 11 (1943): 168–69.

365. Wb 3:109.

366. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 443, sign-list A8.

367. Wb 2:141.

368. Wb 2:139–40.

369. Cf. Rudolf Anthes, “Egyptian Theology in the Third Millennium B.C.,” JNES 18 (1959): 176–77.

370. Our interpretation is supported by P. Leiden T 32 8/16–

17, in Stricker, “Egyptische Mysteriën,” OMRO 37

(1956): 60; and P. Petosiris I lines 80–114, in Lefebvre,

“Textes du tombeau de Petosiris,” 233.

371. Lepsius, Denkmäler aus Ägypten und Äthiopien, 2: pl. 5, quoted in Aylward M. Blackman, “Libations to the Dead in Modern Nubia and Ancient Egypt,” JEA 3

(1916): 32.

372. Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos, 30 §19 lines 23–24.

373. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:163.

374. Siegfried Schott, “Zum Weltbild der Jenseitsführer des neuen Reiches,” in Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, philologisch-historische Klasse, 1965 (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1965), 186–87.

375. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:146–47; Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos, 32–42 §§22–23 lines 27–39.

376. Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep

in Abydos, 31–32 §§21 lines 25–26.

377. Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 23.

378. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:146–47.

379. PT 577 §1524; for more on wine, see commentary, part 4, section on “Forbidden Fruit,” pp. 307–9.

380. P. Westcar 12/1, in Die Märchen des Papyrus Westcar, ed. Adolf Erman (Berlin: Spemann, 1890), 1:68.

381. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 2.

382. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:569; 3: pl. 30.

383. PT 437 §803c–d, in Claudia Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” Aegyptus 48 (1968): 16.

384. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 111 n. 5.

385. P. Bremner-Rhind 14/17, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 26.

386. Jean-Claude Goyon, “Le cérémonial pour faire sortir Sokaris: Papyrus Louvre I. 3079, col. 112–14,” RdE 20

(1968): 69.

387. Dieter Müller, “Die Zeugung durch das Herz in Religion und Medizin der Ägypter,” Or 35 (1966): 255.

388. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 2:185.

389. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 122–23; English trans., 133–34.

390. PT 600 §1653d; 598 §1643a–c; 254 §276a–b; 255

§295a–d, in Dolzani, “Soda e incenso nei Testi delle Piramidi,” 17.

391. CT 45, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:195–96.

392. Federn, “‘Transformations’ in the Coffin Texts,” 254.

393. For more on the word snsn, see above, chapter 1, pp.

18–20.

394. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 17.

395. Baer, “Breathing Permit of Hôr,” 124.

396. P. Louvre N. 3291 line 30, in de Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” pl. XIII.

397. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 37–39, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 46–48.

398. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 367.

399. For the concept of ba, see above, commentary to line 3, pp. 112–16.

400. For more on the duat, see above, commentary to line 18, pp. 202–3.

401. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp.

Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 297.

402. Erik Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen (Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1968), 34.

403. Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen, 36–37.

404. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 39–40, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 47–49.

405. [The sign here is damaged and somewhat ambiguous as to whether it should be read ȝḫ or bȝ. Nibley himself read it both ways. We have retained his discussion here even if we haven’t retained this reading in the translation

—eds.]

406. Wilson, Culture of Ancient Egypt, 67.

407. Wilson, Culture of Ancient Egypt, 85.

408. Grenfell, “Ka on Scarabs,” 79.

409. Žabkar, “Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition,” 83.

410. P. Leiden T 32 1/3–5, in Stricker, “Egyptische Mysteriën,” OMRO 31 (1950): 55.

411. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:7.

412. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 11.

413. Louis Speleers, Textes des Cercueils du Moyen Empire égyptien (Brussels: n.p., 1946), xv.

414. Speleers, Textes des Cercueils du Moyen Empire égyptien, xiii, quoting Augustine, De spiritu et anima 13.

415. Grieshammer, Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 70.

416. Revelation 2:11; 20:6, 14; 21:8; Jan Zandee, “Hoofdstuk 85 van het Doodenboek,” JEOL 2/8 (1942): 585; cf.

Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 269.

417. Grieshammer, Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 68.

418. Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen, 35.

419. Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen, 33.

420. Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen, 30–31.

421. Short Amduat, third hour, lines 70–71, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:7, 29.

422. Grieshammer, Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 70.

423. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 39–41, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 47–49.

424. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 21–22, in Goyon, Papyrus du

Louvre N. 3279, 39–41.

425. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 25–27, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 40–42.

426. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 63.

427. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 65–66.

428. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 64.

429. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 1–2, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 28–30.

430. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 35 n. 8.

431. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 11–13, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 32–33, 35–36.

432. Žabkar, “Observations on T. G. Allen’s Edition,” 85.

433. De Buck, “Chapitre de psychologie égyptienne,” 20.

434. De Buck, “Chapitre de psychologie égyptienne,” 21.

435. Müller, “Zeugung durch das Herz,” 271, 270.

436. Müller, “Zeugung durch das Herz,” 265.

437. Müller, “Zeugung durch das Herz,” 273–74.

Commentary, Part 6

The Fearful Passage

A Dangerous and Toilsome Road

The short version of the Book of

Breathings ends in a blaze of glory, with the

candidate triumphant, beyond the reach of all

his enemies. But the longer version is

extended by a fuller account of the harrowing

tests and narrow escapes he must

experience. “The king in his passage through

the realms of the dead in search of his father

is in danger,” writes Wolfgang Helck;1

Hermann Kees finds almost awesome the

stunning contrast between the Book of the

Dead chapter 70 (i.e., what we have called

the garden episode)—“an almost idyllic

atmosphere,” he calls it, “bright and friendly,

like a picture of country life” —and the frighteningly “dark, mysterious” world of the

Book of the Dead chapter 69, 2 where the life of the initiate, following the example of

Osiris and the king, is in grave jeopardy (fig.

118). There are searching tests, narrow

escapes, and even a full-scale trial before a

stern court of law: “It is singularly

characteristic of the rites,” Joachim Spiegel

observes, “that the king must face the

possibility of a divine prosecution and

punishment and must accordingly be able to

clear himself,” legally as well as morally.3

The trial was no mere empty gesture, as

some have maintained: “not for nothing does

the beast of hell lie in wait” beside the

scales in the courtroom. 4 Without the aid of special documents, no one would get

through; the Book of Breathings is to provide

the holder with identification and

certification while giving him the

information necessary to cope with the

dangers of the road and providing him with

the necessary answers when he is formally

challenged at intervals along the way.5

Without the proper guidance, all would be

lost, for whoever “does not know how to

pass on those ways, he shall be taken by a

(stroke) of death … , being a nonentity who

has no Maat forever.” 6

Figure 118. As Bruyère, “Neb-nerou et Hery-Mâat,”

39, explains this scene (which is found in four princely tombs in the Valley of the Queens), the figure with the knife is the Guardian of the First Gate, who

“prepares the sacrificial block,” i.e., the altar at Herakleopolis. His name as written is Nb-Nryw,

“Lord of Terror,” and he is showing the way to the

reluctant and frightened prince who sits on a seat representing the horizon over the gate—it is the

moment of passage. But above his head are the

reassuring words ḥry-mȝʿ.t, “He rests on Truth,” or

“Truth is his defense.” Restored drawing from tomb of Prince Khaemwaset (QV 44), ca. 1180 B.C.

From the earliest times, as Hermann

Junker notes, even before the coming of the

Osiris religion, the Egyptians believed that

they would have to give an accounting in the

hereafter of deeds done in the flesh, to be

judged “by the Most High God and by Re. ”7

Junker’s thesis is that the Egyptian got

himself out of this danger by conveniently

resorting to magic. Others might run a dire

risk, “but no Egyptian really believed that

such a fate could possibly befall him as an

individual”; hence the moral challenge “that

could have become a blessing in the end

became a curse to the people. ”8 The curse was the easy resort to magic; but as Herman

te Velde has pointed out, the routine appeal

to magic as a quick and simple solution to problems is more a game of modern

scholarship than of ancient Egyptian

religion: “Levi Strauss has remarked that the

term of totemism and likewise the concept of

myth are categories of our thinking, artificial units, which only exist as such in the minds

of scholars engaged in research, while

nothing specific in the outside world

corresponds to them any more. It seems not

impossible to me that he might also call the

concept of magic such an ‘unité artificielle,’

which is continually given a different

content.” 9 Te Velde sees in magic the exploitation of that “divine creative energy,

human creativity, vital potential, mysterious

efficacy” visible in the operations of the

world around us which still remains as

mysterious as ever. 10 Junker himself supplies texts in which devout Egyptians confess their

sinful state and pray for mercy, instead of

relying on a mechanical trick of magic:

“Punish me not for my many sins! For I am

one who knows not himself, a foolish mortal.

All the day I am led by my mouth, as an ox

seeks his feed. … If it is the way of the

servant to sin, it is the way of the master to

be merciful. The Lord of Thebes is not angry

all the day long; his wrath is only for a

moment, and none of it remains!” 11 It has a truly biblical ring, as do the Petosiris

teachings to which Siegfried Morenz calls

attention: “Here there is no escape in magic

or respect of persons.” 12

Claas Bleeker, examining the Egyptian

words for sin and guilt, all of which have more than one meaning, 13 finds texts that

“testify … to a sincere sense of sin and to

full confidence in the mercy and the

forgiveness of deity. ”14 Indeed, it is quite possible to see the diligent cultivation of

magic not as a jaunty self-assurance so much

as a desperate attempt to escape, by hook or by crook, the consequences of guilt.15 One theme that is receiving increasing attention in

ancient studies is “catastrophism” and the

effect of real calamities—natural and social

upheavals of wide extent—on religious

thinking. 16 But quite aside from the apocalyptic imagery which admonishes all to

walk softly, “Men at whiles are sober And

think by fits and starts, And if they think, they

fasten Their hands upon their hearts.” 17 Even in the best of times “the element of

nonexistence … penetrates all things” so that

the Egyptian is reminded of threatening

annihilation no matter which way he turns. 18

It behooves presumptuous man, in his “one

moment in annihilation’s waste,” 19 to go wisely lest he disturb “his harmonious

integration with the existing world. … He

who errs is not a sinner but a fool. ”20 His indiscretions may be ethical sins, cultic sins,

or sins against the cosmic order, 21 but they are unavoidable, so that if any mortal is to

escape his merited doom it will be by a

narrow squeak at best; he makes it in the end,

“but at the price of what labors! The dead

must resort to every device: a satisfactory

display of knowledge [that is where the book

comes in], unflinching courage, even a

measure of aggressiveness.” 22 For all the forms and observances, the Egyptian’s

“second death” remains always a very real

possibility. 23

All this is brought home in the ordinances

that follow. They make up a good deal of the

longer Book of Breathings, so that the shorter

version, which necessarily telescopes them,

may seem to slight them. But the royal tombs

and hypogees of Thebes, all but monopolized

by the theme of the dark and dangerous

journey, leave no doubt as to its central

place in the rites. In theory, the bloody

sacrifice is lawful and inescapable.24

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 66–

69

66 (4/1). Words to be spoken by the gods in

the following of Osiris: O Osiris, God’s

Father, the Servant (Prophet) of the God

Amon-Re,

67. King of the Gods, Prophet of Min-Amon-

Re, Bull-of-His-Mother, upon his great

throne,

68. Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified! Mayest thou follow ( or Thou followest)

69. Re; mayest thou follow Osiris; may thy

ba live for time and eternity!

Commentary

The return here to the full titulary of the

candidate, as well as the introductory

“Words to be recited ( ḏd mdw)” formula,

indicates the beginning of a new book. To the initiate’s titles is added the declaration that

he is now a follower of both Osiris and Re

—a full-fledged member of the royal

progress. It was the custom of the king in

Egypt after his coronation to circulate

throughout the entire land, visiting shrine

after shrine and repeating the creation and

founding rites at each. 25 On these occasions all the people acclaimed the king, 26 and in this portion of the text, the entire following

of Osiris welcomes the subject into the

parade.27 This is the first time we have the liturgical words spoken by a multitude, and

it is a reminder that salvation is a very social

thing for the Egyptian. 28 The first hour of the Amduat ends with a dialogue between the

sun-god and the local inhabitants, 29

reminiscent of the opening scene of more

than one Greek play. At each gate thereafter

the sun-god is cheered and aided on his way

by “a jubilation dance of apes, ostriches, and humans. ”30 At all times there he is in the midst of his crew, his followers, his

disciples, and his worshippers. This strongly

suggests the scene with which Diodorus, an

eyewitness, describes the last act of an

Egyptian funeral: “On the day of burial the

relatives of one to be buried hail the corpse

before the judges and the relatives and

friends of the deceased, having been assured

that he is about to cross the waters, uttering

the name of the one examined. … If no

charges are brought, or no one turns up to

inform against him, the relatives lay aside

their mourning and laud the deceased. …

The multitude joins in the acclamation and

testifies to the character of the defunct as

about to pass the period ( aion) in Hades

with the Blessed.” 31 The above petition was addressed “by the gods” —represented by

the multitude at the funeral—to the initiate;

now a second petition is directed by them to the authorities in charge.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 69–

72

69. … Words to be spoken by the gods

within the duat

70 (4/5). to Osiris, Head of the Westerners,

on behalf of the Osiris, God’s Father,

Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-

71. tȝ.wy, Justified, to open ( or to the end that there be opened) to him the gates of

the duat, to receive thee ( or that it may receive, the word it being crossed out) 72. in ẖr.t-nṯr.

Commentary: Dark Passages and

Gates

If a ship is the best symbol of a journey to

other lands, a gate is the clearest designation of stages along the way: “The Great Ones of

Abydos cry ‘Welcome’ to him; they reach out their arms to him in the nšm.t-bark … that he may journey … toward the gates of the Holy

Land.” 32 The object of the dead is the double one of getting out of the place where he is

and passing into a better one; hence the gate

to heaven when open is the gate of hell when

shut, or, as Erik Hornung notes, the gate

marks the transition between “spheres on this

side and on the other side” and so

corresponds to the horizon between the

upper and lower worlds. 33 The word for

“gate” in our text denotes not just a barrier

but rather a passageway ( Torweg), “a section of the underworld, the center point of which

is formed by the gate ( sbȝ) of the horizon. ”34

The gate is the natural place to stop and

challenge anyone. The designation of the

official barriers as “the Gate of the Place of

Truth” 35 indicates the gate as a place of testing, of trial: “I will not open to you, says

the door, … unless you tell me my name! ”36

In another version of the same episode the

dead may not enter the Hall of the Two

Maats until he has named all the parts of the

door, which parts were the same as those

used to describe the Palace of Justice itself

in the Eighteenth Dynasty.37 Alan Gardiner actually renders ʿrry.t, usually translated as

“gate,” as “court of justice,” noting that “one

is reminded of the Judges of Israel who ‘sat

in the gate.’ But these meanings must be

secondary and derivative.” 38 Yet nothing is more natural or inevitable than testing at the

gate. Chapter 125 of the Book of the Dead

reads like a perfectly normal procedure. The

gatekeeper asks, “Why have you come?”

Answer: “To announce myself!” “What do

you desire?” “I am pure from all evil, I want

the king’s promise of protection.” “Which

god shall I announce?” The answer to this is

given in code, with the challenge, “Is it

that?” To which the answer, “It is Osiris!”

“Correct, proceed!” and the candidate

passes on. 39 In such a situation a Book of Breathings would be of far greater help as a

prompter in giving the answers than as a

ticket or permit, which would have to be

handed over anyway, though it can serve as

both: “Have Anubis open the(se) gates of the

duat to me! Let me make one among the

followers of Osiris! Write a decree within

the temple of the ka of Ptah [i.e., Memphis]

to countermand any opposition to my

progress in ẖr.t-nṯr. ” 40

Figure 119. Atum, Shu, and Tefnut, the creator and first parents of the race respectively, lead out in a parade of ten gods that mounts the fourteen steps or degrees that are the fourteen days between the new moon and the glory of the full moon, represented by the wedjat-eye on the wadj-column, which, along with the four canopic figures that conclude the

parade, also signifies the completeness of restoration or resurrection. Restored drawing, temple of Horus, Edfu, ca. 200 B.C.

Line 72: ẖr.t-nṯr

H̱r.t-nṯr is “the place where the gods are,”

“what is under (the sway of) the gods,” or

“what belongs to the gods,” or, as Gertraud

Thausing puts it, “das Gottesboden.” 41 Steps may take the place of gates, that being the

literal designation of a “degree” of

advancement (fig. 119). 42 The common symbolism is brought out in the Zohar: “The

gates [of Psalm 24:7] … refer to the

supernal grades ( lit. steps) by and through which alone a knowledge of the Almighty is

possible to man, and but for which man

could not commune with God. … Those

gates … are doors for the soul. … At the

present time [the first of these, the door of

righteousness,] remains unknown because

Israel is in exile; and therefore all the other

doors are removed from them, so that they cannot know or commune.” 43 Here it is notable that the gate is not a “spiritual” one

but must be found in the temple. The

“symbols” of the Egyptian mysteries are

creeds, liturgical formulas, and passwords

which “all refer to the peripetia, ” or

moment of passing from one condition to

another, according to Gerardus van der

Leeuw. 44 It appears from the Amduat that the passing of a gate means a change of life; one

gate is even called “Begetter of Forms” and

“Great of Transformations,” 45 and the sun-god as a ram “changes his nature ( ỉrf ḫprw) when he passes through this gate.” Hornung

suggests “sich verwandeln (to transform

oneself)” as the best translation. 46 The change of form or nature does not, however,

entail change of identity.47 This same gate bars the unworthy dead from following the

god any farther.48 One gate is the “Raging

One Who Slaughters the Disaffected. ”49 He admonishes the people: “May your gate be

resistant ( ʿḥȝ, warlike), your portals ( ʿrr.wt, leaves of the door) firm, your bolts fast ( ḫtm, sealed). … Keep your places on the

riverbank!” 50 In the early Christian descensus and “harrowing of hell” stories,

the gates are all-important and suggest

Egyptian inspiration;51 thus in the Amduat:

“The people at this gate say … ‘Open to thee

is the hidden place; … parted for thee are the

doors of the great city; light illumines the

darkness, thou bringest breath to ( lit. srq=k, permittest to breathe) the places of

destruction.’” 52 As the god enters the gate called “the Complete Swallower” after

passing through the waters of Re, he is

greeted: “O appearing Great Spirit! May the

duat receive for thee that ‘flesh’ which

belongs to heaven! … Illumine, great light-

bringer … expel the darkness in the hidden

room. … Illumine the primal darkness that the flesh may live and be renewed!” 53 The gates represent the barriers or confinement

out of which the initiate must break if he is to

continue his progress as ram, bull, sun, and

king;54 he has the power to break out. “I escape all who would seize me,” says the

initiate. “I shall tear down their edifice,

drive them from their seats of power, having

overcome their magic!” 55 It is the purest harrowing of hell.56

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 72–

73

72. … Grant that his ba live forever. He has built mansions in ẖr.t-nṯr.

73. Let his ka praise his god when he has

received the Book of Breathings; grant him

ability to breathe (make breathing)!

Commentary

Line 72: “Grant that his ba live forever. He has built mansions in ẖr.t-nṯr”

H̱r.t-nṯr occurs twice in the line. The

subject is to be received in ẖr.t-nṯr because he has prepared sbḫ.t there. Sbḫ.t is from the root sbḫ—“to enclose,” “shut away” — and

can signify any prepared place of safety. The

word is written here with the ideogram of

the ritual gatehouse, with four protective

uraei guarding it in four directions, followed

by the house and plural signs. This suggests

the four houses around the central reed hut in

the rites of Papyrus Salt 825. On comparing

texts, Jacques de Horrack concludes “that it

is the dead who has built himself a dwelling

and who is being rewarded.” The idea of

building mansions in heaven is not alien to

Egyptians who, like the early Christians,

regarded their earthly houses as mere

stopping places “because they live in them

only for a short time,” their “eternal

dwellings” being on the other side. 57 The same foresight toward a long hereafter is

expressed by the scribe Ani: “I, Ani, have

come into thy presence … because I am one

of those who worshipped thee upon the

earth.” 58 So also in the Book of Two Ways:

“The protection of Horus … is my

protection. (I) have done his will. I have not

been seized, I have not been opposed at the

gates. … I am equipped.” 59

Line 73: “Let his ka praise his god when he has received the Book of Breathings; grant

him ability to breathe (make breathing)!”

The section deals with unlimited breathing

as the ultimate reward of pious deeds,

guaranteed by a written certificate.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 74–

78

74. An offering brought by the king to Osiris,

President of the Westerners, the great God, Lord of Abydos. He makes invocation

75 (4/10). offerings of bread, beer, flesh and

fowl, wine and milk ( or ale), a sacrifice, a food offering (feast of abundance), an

offering of all things

76. agreeable to the ka of Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t,

77. may thy ba be hale, may thy body live; mayest thou flourish by the written decree

of Re himself. Thou shalt never know

death (diminution, extinction)

78. or pain, even as with Re, for time and all

eternity!

Commentary: Sacrifice by the

Living and for the Candidate

The application of royal imagery to the

initiate continues. The ḥtp-dỉ-nsw is

properly “an offering brought by the king,”

which, according to Gardiner, was originally for the king, then by the king for his god, and finally by the king as a boon to those

initiated into the mysteries of Osiris—a gift

of the king to the initiates. 60 The question of who supplies the necessary feast, the heart of

the question, is something of a quibble since

no one comes to a wake or before a god or

king without bringing a contribution with

him.61 Winfried Barta has given the original formula as: “The king gives an offering,

(namely) the offering given to Deity X,” 62

and suggested that the ḥtp-dỉ-nsw magically assisted the sunrise and “the daily rebirth of

the deceased king.” 63 These offerings are ḏfȝ.w, a feast of abundance enjoyed by all,64

a sacramental meal attended by living and

dead alike, affirming continued existence and

family ties. Note the emphasis on blooming

health and high spirits; the menu includes all

that is essential ( nfr, perfect, proper) and

agreeable to a robust existence from the Egyptian point of view.65 The Goyon Book of Breathings offers a very different kind of

ritual meal, representing the three things vital

to existence on the highest level: light, air,

and water.66 There is a notable distinction here. Note that in the Book of Breathings the

menu consists entirely of animal and

vegetable substances, whether solid or

liquid (beer and milk), whereas the other

menu contains none of these highly

perishable things (can this be the idea behind

the unpleasant but common expression of

“eating excrement”?). The long version of

the Book of Two Ways has the initiate

protected against one who eats “what

becomes worms. ”67 The main difference is that one meal is sacrificial in nature,

requiring the taking of life, while the other is

not. It is understandable that heat, air, and

water should bestow life as such, but how

can the eating of perishable animal products

by an equally perishable mortal effect the

painless existence here promised? Answer:

by being more than ordinary food eaten at an

ordinary meal—it is ḏfȝ.w, ritual food,

dedicated sacrificial food, certified as an

offering sanctified by the king.

Figure 120. The famous Papyrus of Ani begins with

this picture of Ani and his wife, dressed in elaborately pleated robes, bringing a lavish food offering with a request for admission, specifically “to behold the god”

and the glory of the sun and moon forever, to be

registered in the tablet of the blessed followers of the god, and finally to be received into the presence of

Osiris in the land of the righteous. The usual purpose of going to the temple is “to behold the god.”

Restored drawing from P. Ani, ca. 1250 B.C. BM

10470 © Copyright The British Museum.

A constant feature of Egyptian funerary

and temple texts is the opening scene of the

petitioner standing with upraised hands by a

lavish heap of food offerings that he has

brought as a sort of price of admission (fig.

120). A minimum requirement of any

suppliant to divine favor is willingness to

pay a price, to express appreciation for what

is offered. The way of salvation begins with

a law of sacrifice. The same applies to the

race as a whole: there must be willingness to

sacrifice if the corporate existence is to

continue. Philippe Derchain points out that

the main purpose of the old Egyptian year-

rite is to preserve the universe, which is in

constant danger of collapse, and that the one

way to do that is by sacrifice. 68

In making a food offering, one is not

merely paying the market price for meat and

vegetables; the plant and animal life offered

is actually a substitute for the life of the

giver. The concept has been brought home to

the writer on various occasions by observing

the attitude of the American Indians toward

the animals they hunt and the corn they

gather: all are real offerings, redeeming man

with a new lease on life. Other lives are

offered that he may escape death this year.

Figure 121. The title above this picture of the man turning his back on a chopping block is “Formula for not entering into the divine slaughter-house.” P. Turin 1791 (BD 50), ca. 150 B.C. Courtesy of Museo

Egizio, Turin, Italy.

Sacrifice as a Substitute Offering for the Candidate

Much has been written about the sacrifice

of Pharaoh in the interest of preserving the

life and guaranteeing the prosperity of the

race69 and the arrangement by which the king escaped death through the offices of a

substitute.70 The principle goes back in Egyptian tradition to the time of the flood,

when the deaths of those who perished

atoned for the sins of those who came after:

“Your sins are remitted,” said the Lord of

All, “for the sacrifice has satisfied the

demand for sacrifice. Such was the origin of

sacrifice.” 71 The substitute victim was not necessarily a righteous person; indeed,

“foreigners, and especially prisoners of war

all the world over, have provided an

obvious supply of substitutes. ”72 So it was in

the flood situation: “Thy Temple rejoices, for the Evil One is at his slaughtering-block,

and the Seba.u fiends suffer because of what

he has done. For he destroyed the earth by a

Flood, according to his accursed plans. The

Sky-goddess … has led him to the block. ”73

Thus the tables were turned, and those who

planned rites of destruction themselves

became the victims—as when the priest of

Pharaoh who attempted to sacrifice Abraham

paid with his own life and thereby gave

satisfaction for Abraham and hence for

Pharaoh. Such a turning of the tables is a

commonplace in the funerary literature:

“Thine enemy the Serpent hath been given

over to the fire. The Serpent-fiend Seba.u

[ sbỉw] hath fallen headlong. … The Sons of Revolt shall never more rise up.” 74

The long lines of beheaded figures

parading on the walls of Ramessid tombs

make it clear that somebody went to the

chopping block. It was not the king, of course, but in these same scenes His Majesty

is nonetheless in a parlous situation as he

braves the dangers of hell. A stock scene

from the funerary papyri shows the dead

person turning his back on a large chopping

block (fig. 121), while accompanying texts

explain that he has escaped the block:

“Enemies who slaughter in the torture

chambers, … I do not fall beneath your

knives, I sit not … at your chopping

blocks!” 75 Émile Suys has published in parallel columns texts from the Middle

Kingdom, New Kingdom, and Late Period,

all repeating the same supplication: “O Re,

… save me from that god of mysterious

forms whose eyebrows are the beams of the

scales [of justice], on the day when the

executioner takes his due, and with his lasso

drags the sinner off to the abattoir for the

dismembering of ba s! Deliver me from …

Osiris’s team of butchers. … O let me not

fall under your knives or go down into your

fire pits (or pots).” 76 “Let not your fires claim me as victim, O you who are upon

your altars of fire!” 77 It is the ritual sacrifice by knife and fire that figures so prominently

in the Busiris and Abraham stories.

Figure 122. “Escaping from the trap” is the

appropriate title of this scene, where the candidate is declared to be a nb ỉmȝḫ, i.e., one who has achieved the worshipful state of the complete initiate “in the presence of his god.” P. Nebseni (BD 153), BM 9900

© Copyright The British Museum.

Initiate’s Narrow Escapes from

Sacrificial Death

More frequent than supplication is the flat

assertion that one has escaped: “I am Shw, properly equipped; I am not seized for the holy slaughterhouse, because I am protected

(covered) by the pectoral. … I do not go

down to the abattoir; the abyss does not

yawn for me!” 78 The Amduat is full of such declarations: “You have not gone down to

the place of destruction ( ḥtmy.t). … Who

knows these things is one who will not enter

into the ḥtmy.t. … The name of this hour is

‘Who Slaughters the Ba s.’” 79

The insistent tone of such protestations

more than implies that the escape of the

subject is a near thing. Along with the knife

and fire, other perils await him; hostile

creatures attempt to grab and hold ( nḏr) him with relentless claws, 80 to catch ( ḫfʿ) him, to swallow ( ʿȝm) him. 81 The executioners nearly succeed in grabbing him by the foot. 82

“My soul is not seized by the falcon and is

not grabbed by the pigs. … It is not snatched

by the earth-gods … nor caught by the power

of magic. … My soul passes by all of them

without a word.” 83 Étienne Drioton has listed some of the narrow escapes found in

volume 4 of Adriaan de Buck’s Egyptian

Coffin Texts—from the net (fig. 122), 84 the cannibals, 85 the block, 86 dying a second time87—and notes that the intended victim escapes only at the last moment, the moment

of extreme danger, by resorting, if necessary,

to miraculous “transformations.” 88

Figure 123. Horus and Seth, the mortal enemies, as

aspects of the same individual—“His Two Faces.”

Restored drawing from tomb of Ramses IX, ca. 1120

B.C.

Is the man ever caught? He is promised

that the wicked will be. Thus whoever

breaks the family tie, “NN shall make his

head pass under the ax of Khnum, of

Nephthys, and of Re.” 89 “The sinner who walketh over this place falleth down among

the knives.” 90 In Roman times, at least, the destroying monsters are depicted as making

their catch. 91

The candidate, for all his self-assurance,

is never allowed to forget that the worst can

happen and that he, as a sinner, deserves no

better. In the perennial contest of Horus and

Seth, each hero in turn exhausts his

supernatural powers in the act of creation

and then pays the price of his presumption by

suffering humiliation and defeat—ritual

demise—at the hand of his rival, who in turn

is reduced to impotence by his exertions and overcome by his opponent, who is really the

other side of his own nature (fig. 123). 92 And the initiate identifies himself with at least

one of the two victorious victims, for “he is

evidently also involved in the contendings of

Horus and Seth.” 93 Made aware of his own limitations, the initiate is thoroughly

scared. 94 “He must pass through the gates whose ruddy openings dimly illuminate the

frightful labyrinth” beyond with a promise of

hellfires; if there is to be any escape here, it

will be a narrow one. 95 At Delphi and at Dodona, the initiate must experience the

same terrors: “bathed and anointed, …

wearing fillets like a sacrificial victim, he

then approaches the oracular chasm. … In

the darkness a blow falls on his skull, so that

he seems to die, and an invisible speaker

then reveals … many mysterious secrets.” 96

The grimmer episodes of the rites,

especially as found in the Book of the Dead, have been examined by Kees, who

emphasizes three things: their disturbingly

negative nature, their extreme secrecy, and

the strange way in which the initiate changes

his name and identity while always

remaining himself. To summarize briefly:

1. In the same “frightening underworld

atmosphere” that pervades the Book of Two

Ways, 97 the candidate, though on his way to glory, presents himself in an attitude of

humility, 98 and what follows seems to be for the time all bad; a mystifying obscurity

characterizes the “bad things ( schlimme

Dinge),” which consist of inflicting “the

secret wounds ( sqrw)” including the

mutilating of the eye of the sky-god

( Himmelsgott), the mutilating of the body of Osiris during its embalming by Anubis, and

other blows.99 As we have noted elsewhere, the Egyptian embalming table was

constructed exactly like an altar of sacrifice (see Abraham, Facsimile 1, fig. 4), for the

embalming rites included ritual blows

inflicted on the corpse in imitation of the

sacrificial death of Osiris. 100 Indeed, Kees notes that in this phase of the rites the “royal

bed” is also the royal birthplace, the throne

of coronation with its lion heads, the bier of

the king’s father, and, as the msḫn.t, 101 the divine mother and nurse, both Edjo and

Nekhbet; for the msḫn.t is also the cosmic instrument of resurrection used in the

Opening of the Mouth as well as a delivery

stool for use at birth and rebirth. Thus the

lion couch is more than ever the supreme

coincidentia oppositorum of death and birth.

With the fall of Seth (who thereby becomes

the victim in the place of Horus—i.e., his

substitute), Horus “becomes mighty through

the injuries which he received. ”102

2. To make the situation more baffling, the

“wounding of the god” is a thing which must not be known,’ concerning which the speaker

(candidate) must be initiated only by the

mouth of a priest, and which he must vow

never to divulge, even to the gods.” Indeed,

the ultimate crime of Seth, the adversary,

was not that he inflicted damage on Osiris,

but that “he named thy secret woundings, ”103

even as the watchers of old revealed the

same in the days of Enoch, and that he also

named the one receiving the wounds, the

knowledge of which things is a source of

power not to be given away to anyone. 104 Yet it is assumed, according to Kees, that the

initiate has knowledge of the secret wounds

himself. 105

3. Another anomaly is that the initiate

during the operation is always himself, even

though he takes the role both of Anubis, who

inflicts the blows, and Thoth, who heals

them (and vice versa); he does all “in his

own name,” which makes him also both the creator and the first man—the giver and

receiver of life respectively. 106 He comes like Horus in the lion-couch drama107 to rescue his father Osiris on the bed, but to do

so he lays himself on the altar bed and “feels

himself in the passive situation of Osiris,

being himself in need of rescue. ”108 It is hard to identify the initiate with any particular

god, Kees notes, because he is free to take

any divine role required by the occasion or

simply to remain unassigned and

noncommittal as suits him. 109 As the son, he rescues his father, Osiris, but as a mortal, he

is that smitten god. As a healer, he assumes

the role of Thoth sitting beside the bed; yet

when he speaks of the enemy who has

overcome him, he has in mind not the

overcoming of Osiris by Seth so much as his

own death as the consequence of evil

powers.110 He announces that he is “Osiris,

head of the family,” “the heir of Geb,” that he is “(also) Orion,” “the elder Horus,”

“Anubis,” nay, “I am the Lord of All, I am

Osiris!” 111 This declaration comes immediately under the heading, “How to

become a substitute ( Stellvertreter, proxy) for Osiris.” That is the answer—substitution

unlimited. “The dominant motif” of the

whole thing, according to Kees, “is the fate

of Osiris—death,” and to deal with it the

candidate may assume any role or name

necessary, “feeling himself in each part.” 112

What renders such substitution possible and

plausible is the profound identity of father

and son: “The apparently illogical aspect of

the metamorphosis is explained by the divine

renewal in the son (Horus). That is the great

mystery.” 113 It is symbolized most dramatically in the lion couch: The initiate,

in order to achieve the ultimate glory of

Horus, “suffers through death the same fate

as Osiris … and expects to rise again ‘as an Osiris.’” 114

Thausing never tires of reminding us that

“every mystery calls for ‘Stirb und Werde’

(life through death). That is its only meaning!

Every initiation has as its aim the experience

of death.” 115 The complete expression of the idea is Osiris: “Osiris is, in one word, the

‘Stirb und Werde,’” 116 the moment of transition between opposite states of

existence, whose role in the moment of

passage is assumed by the king, 117 and whose holy office is symbolized and

dramatized among the great shrines of Egypt

by the figure of the man on the lion couch. 118

Thus a hymn to Amon proclaims: “Thou liest

on thy couch conceiving [thyself], and the

earth becometh light at thy birth. ”119

The Arrested Sacrifice: Christian

and Jewish Parallels

While the concept of the substitute sacrifice has been studied much, an

important aspect of it, the arrested sacrifice,

remains little known. It is clearly set forth in

the case of Isaac, who allowed himself to be

bound and offered (that is the meaning of the

ʿaqedāh), but whose sacrifice was arrested at the critical moment with the declaration,

“now I know that thou fearest God, seeing

thou hast not withheld,” neither Abraham nor

Isaac withholding what was dearest to them

on earth (Genesis 22:12). When the one

being tested has proven his faith to the limit,

there is no point to continuing the sacrifice

since the price has already been paid by

another and a substitute (savior) has been

provided. But in order to benefit by the

ransom, the one thus delivered must prove

his good faith by freely offering to forfeit his

life, if necessary.

Figure 124. Ani turns his back on the block in a

chapter entitled “Not going to the [chopping] block of the god,” wherein Ani declares that he will not lose his head because it was firmly tied on for him in

heaven, at his first birth, at his hair-cutting initiation by the gods of the pȝ.wt (premortal world), and by the mother Nut before the creation. The tying on of the head signifies the everlasting endurance of the body.

P. Ani, ca. 1250 B.C. BM 10470 © Copyright The

British Museum.

So what follows after the garden episode

is very serious business indeed. In the course

of his journey, the candidate is subjected, as

Abraham was, to a “horror of great

darkness” (Genesis 15:12), to death in the

form of a series of strange sacrifices. Since

he deserves death, there is no reason why the sacrifices should not be real, and they are

real—only, at a certain point, each is

arrested; that is the narrow escape from the block (fig. 124). (We have treated this theme

at considerable length in discussing the

sacrifices of Abraham, Isaac, and Sarah,

especially in their Egyptian context. )120

The antiquity of the arrested sacrifice is

attested by the rite of circumcision. One

could not be admitted into the secret wisdom

of the Egyptians without circumcision.121

Scholars have viewed this as a barbaric,

albeit hygienic, custom, and nothing more;

yet in Egypt circumcision was the special

prerogative of priests122 and at all times was, as in Israel, the sign of sanctification

and initiation, “signifying acceptance into the

priesthood, while the circumcision itself was

a dedication ( Weihe) . ” 123 In Israel circumcision was definitely a sign of blood

sacrifice and of atonement, the mark of the initiate and the covenant, the subjects being

treated as sacrificial victims. 124 As the visible mark of the holy covenant, says the

Zohar, the circumcision performed by a

father on his son is “the sacrificial act, as it

were, an altar of atonement.” 125

Circumcision was practiced from the earliest

times in northern Syria, and it has been

suggested that it was “adapted by the ruling classes” in Egypt at the end of the Gerzean

period. 126 While Joshua recognized the likeness of the Egyptian and Israelite rites,

he refused to accept the validity of the

former (Joshua 5:2–5), a reminder that the

Egyptian ordinances are but an imitation of

the real ones (Abraham 1:26); the Egyptians

indeed did not understand the purpose of

sacrifice.127 In Egypt the first initiate whose example all must follow was Osiris, who

suffered sacrificial death but was restored

completely with the exception of the one member, whose defect preserved the

permanent evidence of sacrifice128 by the shedding of blood. 129 Hence we would suggest that the practice of circumcision in

Egypt, as in Israel, was yet another token of

arrested sacrifice in which blood was

actually shed.

Among many people, ritual scars on the

body are the proud marks of the initiation. 130

In Egypt the boast of the complete initiate

(the teleios) is “I have inherited the horizon.

… I am indeed Lord of All. … I have

inherited the horizon. … I am Atum, lord of

wounds.” 131

In Judeo-Christian tradition, the first

representative of the arrested sacrifice is

Adam, who, as he was sacrificing on an

altar, calling upon God with upraised hands,

was accosted by Satan, who tried to

sacrifice him, smiting him on the right side

with a sharp stone. Adam fell upon the altar, and Satan fled. While Eve attempted to raise

up her husband, and just as he was at the

point of death, God accepted his blood

flowing upon the altar as a sacrifice “and

thus sent down his word and healed

Adam.” 132 Thus, as in the cases of Abraham and Isaac, the sacrifice, though arrested, was

no mere empty form since it was clearly in

the process of being carried out to the end in

good faith.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 79–

89

79. O ( or Hail) thou who comest striding

forth from Heliopolis! The Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, is not guilty ( lit. to him 80 (4/15). is no doing) of light-mindedness

( or wrongdoing).133

81. O thou Great Assailant, who cometh

forth from the warrior city, Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born of

82. Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t-snb, hath committed no

robbery!

83. O Thou with the Beak, coming forth from

Hermopolis, Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-

Wr, Justified, born of

84. Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t-snb, hath not been guilty of rapacity (evil speech? oppression?)!

85 (4/20). Hail, (O) Swallower of the Eye,

who cometh forth from the Two Caverns!

The Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr,

Justified, born of

86. Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t-snb, hath not taken property (things) in a high-handed manner.

87 (5/1). Hail, thou Terrible-of-face, coming

forth from Rostau! Osiris, God’s Father,

Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, has not been contentious.

88. Hail, Rw.ty (Two Lionesses), coming

forth from heaven! The Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, did not do iniquity in hardness of heart.

89. Hail, Thou Whose Eye Is as Fire, coming

forth from Letopolis! The Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, did not do defilement.

Commentary: The Challenge at the

Seven Deadly Gates, The Negative

Confession

In the section that follows, the grave

predicament of the initiate is brought home to

him by a series of savage directed assaults,

charging him with a list of mortal offenses of

which no man’s conscience is entirely free.

In lines 79–89 the candidate is challenged.

This is a form of the famous Negative

Confession of the Book of the Dead chapter

125. The challenge at the gate134 is a familiar form and aspect of initiation rites the world

over. 135 Here the candidate is challenged at seven gates, matching “the seven gates

through which the solar bark passes” in the

Book of the Dead chapter 144 and section 2

of the Book of Two Ways. 136

These are the most definite and

spectacular challenges of all. It is not merely

the obstacle of the gate or a conscientious

guard that challenges the aspirant, but a

savage and aggressive monster. More

realistic than we are, the Egyptians knew that

there is no gentle death, that the monster’s

face always strikes terror, and that after

every conceivable provision has been made,

there is still a chance that we are either

unqualified to go on or, worse still, that we

have been wishfully deluding ourselves

about the whole thing. 137 In leaving this life, everyone is summoned by a messenger,

whose appearance always catches us off

guard and, to say the least, is disquieting; the

Egyptians, haunted by the too many unknown

quantities connected with his mission,

inevitably came to think of him as a devil

and his home as hell, reflecting their own

fear of the unknown. 138

Figure 125. This document, as the title proclaims, is for “knowing the names of the guardian of the Seven Gates.” P. Turin 1791 (BD 144), ca. 150 B.C.

Courtesy of Museo Egizio, Turin, Italy.

It is in the Negative Confession of the

Book of the Dead chapter 125 that we find

the closest affinities of Egyptian religion to

early Judaism and Christianity. The most

obvious clue in the present case is supplied

by the number seven. Whatever the origin of the idea of seven gates, with seven trials, challenges, and sins to match, it is very old;

consider Abydos, city of seven gates, each with its special guardian shutting out a

special domain (fig. 125). 139 As we find it in our Book of Breathings, Thausing notes that

the soul’s journey always takes place in units

of seven steps. 140 In the Babylonian tradition also, one must pass by seven demons

guarding seven gates before receiving “life

and … breath to the heart.” 141 Gerald Wainwright finds in Egypt from prehistoric

times the king’s rule measured in seven-year

spans, at the end of which he either was

sacrificed or bought another seven-year span

by offering a substitute.142 A ritual variant of the seven-year period is a forty-two-year

period, 143 and in the psychostasy it is not seven but forty-two judges who sit in the

court. 144 The seven sins of which the candidate is cleared in the de Horrack text

are the first seven sins in the list of forty-two

sins in Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 145

from which we may assume that the list of

seven is simply an abbreviated form of the

full list, for the king originally had to be

cleared of forty-two sins. 146 But it is a symbolic abbreviation, in which the number

seven is consistently and exclusively used.

The seven hellish princes of the underworld

in the Christian Coptic writings are a

legitimate Egyptian heritage, 147 as are the seven hekhalot (heavenly halls) of Jewish

tradition, with their seven doors “guarded by

terrible warriors,” which can be passed “by

formulas which have the virtue of

compelling the angels to grant him

admission.” 148 Back in the Thirteenth Dynasty, King Neferhotep is tested for his

knowledge at each of seven gates and only

qualifies for kingship because His Majesty

“knows the gates … the pylons of the Field

of Reeds,” 149 for interrogation is an essential

part of the business. 150 As we have seen above, 151 to “know a gate” meant to be able to describe all its parts, these being identical

with the parts of the judgment hall, while

each monster’s brows form the two arms of

the scales of the law court, 152 so that facing these creatures at their gates is the same as

being tested in the Hall of the Two Maats.

How closely the list of seven sins in our

Book of Breathings matches the traditional

Christian seven deadly sins depends on the

shade of meaning attributed to each one. In

the Coptic Gospel of Mary, the soul on its journey comes to the fourth exousia or

power, which has seven forms—namely,

darkness, lust, ignorance, deadly

provocation, the dominion of the flesh,

wrath, and passion. These ask the soul:

“Whence do you come, thou slayer of men?”

But the soul is able to escape them by turning

them aside with the declaration, “My

epithymia is at an end and ignorance has perished!” 153 Our Book of Breathings supplies the transition to this Christian

version. Related lists of sins may be found in

the New Testament, the Enoch literature, 3

Baruch, and the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (Maldwyn Hughes cites Gustav

Deissman’s claim “that the Primitive

Christian lists of virtues and vices were

based on Jewish and pagan series”). 154 But while the concept of seven such sins is

significant, we cannot be dogmatic about the

list since the Christian lists vary155 as widely as the Egyptian.156 The seven sins in Papyrus Louvre N. 3292 are quite different

from those in the de Horrack text, and the

gods and their shrines of testing are also

different.157

Drioton holds that the Negative

Confession bears the marks of an initiation

rite so strongly that it would seem to be the

production of a religious cult that flourished along with the Essenes, having “only a brief

existence in Egyptian religion.” 158 George Nagel finds that the declarations of the

Negative Confession as found in his

Breathings text, Papyrus Louvre N. 3292, are

“strictly moral, ”159 and Françoise de Cenival comes still closer to home in calling

attention to the resemblance of the Negative

Confession situation to certain examinations

of members conducted by Egyptian temple

associations, which in turn remind her

slightly of the initiation process in the Rule of the Community of the Dead Sea

Scrolls.160 In Christian Egypt, Oswald Burmester finds the guardians of the gates,

the accusers of Amente, and the avengers

with divers faces all surviving in the Coptic

apocryphal writings. 161 Like their ideas of sin, the Egyptians’ beatitudes are genuinely

religious in nature, resembling those of the

Bible, Jacques Dupont reluctantly admits. 162

Lines 79–80: “O ( or Hail) thou who comest striding forth from Heliopolis! The Osiris,

God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, is not guilty ( lit. to him is no doing) of light-mindedness ( or wrongdoing)”

The titles of the candidate may here be

significant. He is now Osiris without any

personal name, and his father is not

classified as “Justified.” The interesting

thing is that the candidate here does not go

by his own name, which heretofore he has

never been without. This may be an

indication that care is being taken not to put

him in real jeopardy. In the Book of the Dead

chapter 125, the candidate, when challenged,

gives only the name of Osiris and is allowed

to pass. 163 In each case the challenger

“comes forth from his shrine” with fierce

and alarming aggression. The aggressive

nature of the gatekeepers is vividly expressed in their names in the Book of Two

Ways: Aggressor’ is its [the way’s] name. He

will charge down upon its striking-force.

‘Furious-of-fire’ is its name,” etc. 164 Klaus Baer insists that “pr m” is only meant to

indicate that each one “originates in” his

particular place. 165 Even without the pr

“coming forth” with the determinative of

striding legs, the preposition m would be

enough to justify the livelier interpretation.

Would the first challenger be designated

simply as the Strider if he were not in

terrifying motion? “Do not charge down

upon me,” says the man to the first of the

seven gatekeepers (“the Butcher”) in the

Book of Two Ways. 166 Since the Wide-Strider issuing from the sun-shrine of

Heliopolis is Re, one thinks immediately of

the wide-striding Apollo, the angry sun-god

at his most sinister, making the rounds of his

shrines in the opening lines of the Iliad.167 In the classic version of the Book of the Dead

125, the Negative Confession is addressed to

forty-two monsters rushing from forty-two

gates: “They issue forth from various

designated places, temple complexes or

regions of the beyond, or levels of

awareness ( Erkenntnisse)”; 168 only in the later period were the forty-two demons

converted to the more staid forty-two judges

of the vignettes. But there is nothing pacific

about the knife-bearing figures at the gates of

the shrines in the vignettes to Goyon’s Book

of Breathings (see pp. 78–79, fig. 17);

waving their swords, the two men stride

toward shrines with open gates—are they

going in or out? Two monster-headed

creatures sit before closed gates guarded by

fire-spewing cobras; each of these monsters

is crowned with the two maat-feathers of

justice and holds a sacrificial knife in either

hand—they are plainly sitting in judgment at the gates. 169 When a god acts against anyone, he necessarily “comes forth” from his place,

a biblical expression which strongly

suggests the present pr m. Thus, to counter the serpents, Thoth “comes forth from

Hermopolis” against them. 170 When one approaches the holy and inviolable shrine of

a god, it is the god who is being challenged,

and according to primordial royal code, he

has no choice but to respond with instant and

terrifying elan, rushing forth to meet the

challenger in the manner of ancient ritual

combat.171

Seven Sins and Seven Monsters

The first of the seven sins in our text is not

the usual and expected ỉsf.t— the proper

word for transgression in general as the

opposite of Maat—but is, rather, ỉs.t,

meaning “light-mindedness.” 172 This could

be a scribal error, but in view of the liberty taken by scribes with these particular texts, it

is not necessarily such since in the situation

it makes very good sense: in these solemn

moments of initiation with all their life-and-

death implications, there is no greater sin

and folly than to hold these high and holy

things in contempt, to treat them lightly, or to

approach them with mental reservations.

This is borne out at the tenth gate of the

Amduat, whose hour is named the “Raging

One Who Slaughters ( ḥs.t) the Disaffected

(or Indifferent One, ẖȝkw-ỉb), ”173 where the fierce aggression of the god matches the

contempt of the initiate for holy things.

Iamblichus notes that among the Egyptians,

as opposed to the Chaldeans, covenants are

accompanied by penalties and threats,174 and certainly the worst breach of any covenant is

to take it lightly. 175 In Papyrus Sensaos we read: “I am Horus, Lord of Letopolis (the

place of sacrifice by fire), Lord of the House (place) of coming forth to slaughter

(sacrifice) those who apostatize ( wḏȝ.w,

those who turn away).” 176 The main concern of the Egyptian Satan (Typhon) is to turn

men’s minds from the ordinances in

confusion, frustration, and indifference,

according to Plutarch. 177 The six sins that follow on our list are theft, rapacity, fraud,

trouble-making, arrogance, and gluttony,

which compare closely enough with the

classic Christian catalogue of pride,

covetousness, lust, wrath, gluttony, envy, and

sloth, though as noted, the Egyptian lists are

by no means fixed and rigid.

Lines 81–82: “O thou Great Assailant, who cometh forth from the warrior city, Osiris,

God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born of Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t-snb, hath committed no robbery”

A new element is here added to the

father’s name, snb, meaning health or prosperity. Why? We can only guess. ᴈt

means to attack or assail and is here written

appropriately with a hippopotamus. The

same word signifies a moment of time and is

rendered “great of moment” by de Horrack

and “Great Hour” by Wallis Budge. A

variant reading, from Papyrus Louvre N.

3291, is šfy, which also means “majesty,”

making the guardian “great of majesty,”

though this could be a slip in writing for šʿ,

“attack” or “attacker.” The place from which

this terror issues is H̱r-ʿḥȝ.w, 178 “the domain of the warriors,” and it is interesting that the

place still goes by the name of Cairo (Arabic

Qahirah), “the Conquering One.” The name

of the tenth hour of the Amduat is “the

Raging One Who Slaughters ( ḥs.t, sacrifices) Him Who Lags.” In the “formula for

breathing” of Papyrus Sȩkowski, the

candidate enters “the circle ( m-ẖnw pẖry.w)

of those with warlike ( ʿḥȝw) face(s)” and there takes his throne or seat.179

Lines 83–84: “O Thou with the Beak, …

Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born of Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t-snb, hath not been guilty of rapacity (evil speech? oppression?)”

The Wörterbuch gives Fnḏy the Latin parallel of Naso as a proper name, 180 but it is notable that all the seven guardians are

addressed by epithets, only Rw.ty having

what might be called a proper name—and

that too is a description (“the Two

Lionesses”) rather than a name. With the

Egyptians names are epithets, and Fnḏy

properly designates Thoth as the long-

beaked ibis, 181 the “Beaky one,” 182 his actual name being here diplomatically avoided. It

should also be noted that at each of the gates

the punishment fits the crime mentioned, the

gatekeeper threatening the candidate with the

same treatment that he is accused of inflicting on others: “the punishment is akin

to the sin committed. ”183 Thus it is the all-seeing Re of Heliopolis at the first gate

whom no impiety or sin or light-mindedness

escapes; it is the same hippopotamus who

wrecks the fields and sheds in his nocturnal

depredations who, as constable of the

warrior city, punishes the robber at the

second gate; and now, at the third gate, it is

the ibis with formidable bill who pursues

those who commit acts of insolence and

oppression. Since Thoth is the god of justice

and his city is Hermopolis, such acts of

injustice would come under his surveillance.

De Horrack gives the whole passage a

legalistic turn, observing that he was not an

eager litigant nor did he hale people into

court! 184 On the other hand, the name of Fnḏy occurs in a Pyramid Text actually designated

as a “Book ( šʿ.t)” of Breathings, referring to

the nose of the king as Thoth “der Nasige. ”185

Though the first two gatekeepers are

apparently in human form, the others all have

something monstrous about them—not as

bogies to scare people, it would seem, but as

reminders that there is something monstrous

about sin itself. Émile Amélineau noted that

Vergil’s Cerberus, “the Great Devourer,” is

the same kind of monster as we find in the

Egyptian funerary papyri, who for all his

intimidating aspect really has no function at

all since “the dead had already been

declared just.” 186

The crime mentioned at the third gate is a

hapax— a word not found anywhere else—

so all one can do is try to relate the root to

something and consider the context. The

corresponding crime named in the Ani text of

the Book of the Dead is ṯȝwỉ, literally, “a gathering up of things” —implying theft,

greed, and covetousness187—and is ʿwnw,

“robbery,” in Lepsius;188 Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch has ỉrỉ ʿwn-ỉb, “doing theft in the heart,” or covetousness,

translated “Ich war nicht neidig! ” by

Thausing. 189 Our text reads nn ỉr(ỉ) NN qmȝ

ʿš, “produce (be the cause of) groaning,”

though qmȝ is not absolutely certain; ʿš can mean to groan in the expression ʿš sgb,190

and Baer renders the passage, “NN has not

made people groan.” 191 It is helpful that the parallel texts from the Book of the Dead all

emphasize covetousness.

Lines 85–86: “Hail, (O) Swallower of the Eye, who cometh forth from the Two

Caverns! The Osiris, God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr,

Justified, born of Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t-snb, hath not taken property (things) in a high-handed

manner”

The secrets of acquiring property are

craftiness and brashness, both emphasized here. The Swallower of the Eye is Seth, who

steals away the moon, whether by eclipse,

storm clouds, or its normal phases; “under

the form of a black pig he swallowed the left

eye” and then attacked the right eye, which

“after [the] full moon … was eaten away

piecemeal by him.” 192 The two caverns from which the Swallower issues forth are the

abysses from which the waters of the Nile

burst forth and also the regions of the

underworld, 193 fittingly depicted in both capacities as two serpents spitting poison. 194

Here they are designated as the qrr.t, caves through which the sun-god passes on his visit

to the underworld. At the right hand of the

Swallower are two fire pits, or ovens of

hell, matching his two eyes. Fire and water

qualify equally well as swallowers, and in

the Book of Gates what is fire for one person

may be water for another.

Line 87: “Hail, thou Terrible-of-face, coming forth from Rostau! Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, has not been contentious”

The last element of the parental name is

here omitted, apparently to get the whole

declaration on a single line, indicating the

usual scribal flexibility. Again, the punisher

fits the crime. Nḥȝ-ḥr is a countenance that is

“wild, fearsome, dangerous,” referring

usually to dangerous and aggressive animals,

especially to Apophis, the great serpent,

“Repulsive-of-face.” 195 In the Amduat the traveler passes through the fields, taking

possession of his holy land ( tȝ-ḏsr) as he

“smites and binds Hỉw (the Smiter) and Nḥȝ-ḥr, ” 196 both names designating the serpent. 197

The initiate is warned that whoever does not

know and perform certain rites ( ḥkȝ.w) on

earth will not be able to resist and turn aside

Nḥȝ-ḥr. 198 The name can also apply,

however, to a place, a fire, a wind, a voice, a disease, a mood, but especially a

countenance, as here. It is the natural

designation of evil beings—in particular,

Seth and Apophis, the two archenemies of

man—and is “also [thought of] as a

crocodile or hippopotamus,” the two

archdestroyers of Egypt.199 The emphasis on the creature’s depressing appearance is for

the benefit of the “troublemaker,” sḫw, “one who makes others angry, who stirs up

wrath”; with its causative prefix and stick-

wielding ideogram, the word means

“dispute.” 200 Ḫwn is the deadly attack of a snake, scorpion, or horned beast and could

apply to damage inflicted by evil

speaking.201 It is the troublemaker and backbiter who here meets his match. The

serpent Nḥȝ-ḥr, “Terrible-of-face,” appears also in the seventh hour of the Amduat,

where the guide who gets the initiate past

this dangerous obstacle has the name of

“Beheader of Nḥȝ-ḥr.” 202 Another name for the demon of the seventh hour is Mds-ḥr,

“with violent face,” the face in question

being that of a cat.203 In section 4 of the Book of Two Ways, the sentinels along the

way include “Numerous-of-faces,” “Great-

face,” “Opposed-face” (or “Repulsive”),

“Dog-face,” “Face-of-(corpses),”

“Hippopotamus-face,” “Sharp-of-face” —

seven faces in all, some good and some bad,

the object of this operation being to

“propitiate the face of Osiris.” 204

Figure 126. Rw.ty over a doorway in a royal tomb.

The two-headed sphinx (usually two lions) is the symbol of passage—here of the solar-bark, as is seen in the labels of the two heads, “a proper (good)

entrance” and “a proper exit.” Restored drawing

from tomb of Ramses IV, ca. 1130 B.C.

Line 88: “Hail, Rw.ty (Two Lionesses), coming forth from heaven! The Osiris, God’s

Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, did not do iniquity in hardness of heart”

Here the hard-hearted man meets the

pitiless lion of the desert. Rw.ty, a double-headed lion facing in two directions, is, like

the Roman Janus, eminently well suited to be

a gatekeeper, as the crouching lions that still

flank the entrances to many a public building

testify to this day. He is the guardian of the

crucial seventh gate in the Amduat, the

halfway point in the journey (fig. 126). 205 As a symbol of sacrificial death, the lion couch

is familiar. 206 The fault to be chastened is

that of being ḫt-ỉb, literally “wooden-of-heart,” the sign for wood being written twice

and followed by the ideogram for “hostility”

or “enmity.” François Chabas drops the

second wood symbol as a scribal error and

interprets the two remaining ones as meaning

“hardness of heart,” following the Coptic

parallel mnt-našt-n-hēt. 207 While the best-known lion pair in Egypt is that of Shu and

Tefnut in their warlike aspect, the present

Rw.ty is nearer to ᴈkr, the double lion who sits guarding the sun between two mountains

in Papyrus Louvre N. 3292, it being his

assignment to “give passage to the sun and to

the dead in the other world,” where the

candidate is sure to meet up with him (fig.

127).208

Figure 127. Four ba- birds, with the deceased in the lead, raise their arms in adoration to the solar disk as it rests on the two lions, Manu and Baku, representing the mountains of the east and the west. P. Louvre N.

3292, ca. 850 B.C. Courtesy of Louvre Museum.

Line 89: “Hail, Thou Whose Eye Is as Fire, coming forth from Letopolis! The Osiris,

God’s Father, Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, born to Ns-ḥr-pȝw.t, did not do defilement”

This fiery eye is dangerous. To refer to the

inevitable commonplace of the two eyes of

Horus as the sun and the moon does not help

much more than does careful pinpointing of

Letopolis on the modern map of Egypt. The

thing to note is that Letopolis was the most

frightening place in Egypt, the place of

awesome nocturnal rites of fire walking and

fire sacrifices. 209 The city’s Egyptian name bears the sign of Sekhmet, the fire-breathing

lioness with the great sacrificial knife. Its

Greek name of Letopolis marks it as the

place of Edjo, the lady of the Delta, and the

fire-spitting uraeus-serpent, often identified

with Hathor as the fiery Eye of Re, i.e., the

burning sun. 210 It was the thunderbolt city of the prehistoric Min of the thunderbolt or

meteorite.211 Thunderbolt, fiery eye, fire-spitting serpent, fire-walking rites, Sekhmet

of the fiery eye that consumes all before it—

all strike dread into the heart of the morally

corrupt. The crime in this case is sȝw, moral weakness in general.212 The root sȝw has the double meaning of secrecy and satiation and

is applied to Apophis in an evil sense; it

also means to weaken or damage parts of the

body or to move stealthily. 213 The sinister nature of this gate suits well with Letopolis

as the place of dark, cruel, hidden, and

bloody doings. Hornung mentions the

Egyptian concept of the destruction of the

wicked by fire. 214 It is sacrificial fire from which the initiate escapes: “I come

unscathed out of the fire; I am not treated

with violence” 215 (he is able to escape the flame, being flame himself). 216 The longest spell of the Book of Two Ways promises

whoever knows it that he will be like Re

above and Osiris below and that “there is no

flame against him forever.” 217

The Ritual Combat: Its Various

Forms

Figure 128. The contest with the great serpent Apep, who bars the way of deliverance, is depicted in

everything from full-scale battle scenes to simple confrontation with knife and the breath of life ( snsn) , or even with the mere power of the word, shown by

the scroll. P. Wesay, Khary (BD 38, 42), ca. 1325

B.C. BM 9949 and BM 9950 © Copyright The British

Museum.

Behind all Egyptian year-rites from the

earliest times is “the idea of perpetual

conflict” with survival of the ordered

universe at stake. 218 Derchain sees in Papyrus Salt 825 a clear declaration that the

cosmic order is constantly being threatened

with disruption and extinction, that the world

is constantly on the defensive for its very

existence, and that we should all therefore be

concerned to find out if there is anything we

can do to pitch in and help. 219 According to Papyrus Salt 825, the enemy must be

overthrown anew every day forever;220 those responsible for the ordinances effecting this

overthrow are themselves in mortal peril and

must take every precaution against assassination;221 life is a deadly duel of forces of survival and destruction trying to

outwit and overpower each other, 222 and the end must be the total extermination of one or

the other.223 We can never rest because “life is always on the defensive,” what with “the

powers of nonexistence constantly intruding

upon the creation” so that we must stave off

death from moment to moment. 224

E. A. E. Reymond sees in the ritual combat

the central motif of the Egyptian temple. 225 It was after overcoming the great serpent of the

place (fig. 128) that Atum first established

the rites of Heliopolis,226 where later Re, in the form of a cat, destroyed the serpent’s

children. 227 The Israelites’ “War of Jahwe”

was borrowed from the Egyptians, according

to Alfred Rupp, as part of the creation

tradition;228 and everywhere in Jewish and

early Christian tradition we find the creation following hard upon the victory of the

heavenly hosts over a rebellious band in

heaven, as in the opening scene of Paradise

Lost.

The combat motif is constantly turning up

in the Book of Breathings, taking dramatic

form in the challenges at the gates. The

warrior city of the second gate is really “the

mythical locale and battleground of Horus

and Seth.” 229 Papyrus Louvre N. 3279

contains the victory paean: “I spread my

(two) legs in walking; appearing in glory, I

overthrow my enemies. I have appeared in

glory in heaven; I have conquered as a god; I

have been mighty as Atum. ”230 The initiate in the Sensaos Breathings texts describes

himself as Horus, Lord of Combat,

slaughtering those who resist or rebel.231 As might be expected, the ritual combat takes

many forms. Thus the older Egyptian texts

constantly flash back to a time of the conquest and settlement of the land, when

Pharaoh achieved his glory and dominion by

brute force; in the funerary literature this

tradition appears as a sort of assault on

heaven itself, as in the famous Cannibal

Hymn, 232 spell 567 of the Coffin Texts,233

and chapters 10 and 11 of the Book of the

Dead. In our Book of Breathings, the element

of combat appears in the prominence of

Horus the Behdetite, who overthrew his

enemies in combat on the waters, 234 for even the ritual washing is cross-referenced to a

water battle in which “Horus repels all evil

from his father.” 235 The primordial water fight belongs to early solar myths which tell

of the place of combat near the place of the

sunrise, where the victory of the sun

guarantees the rule of the Egyptian king in

peace. 236 The serpent who blocks the progress of the solar-bark must be overcome

at the lake of combat (fig. 129). 237 At Hermopolis the ritual battleground was

called “the Lake of the [Two] Knives,”

where was found the same ritual complex of

lake, fire, and primordial hill as at nearby

Herakleopolis with its pool of flames.238

The combat and victory motifs are thus

entirely in place at the scene of the sunrise-

and washing-rites, incongruous as it may

seem; as Kees explains it, the Fire Island

“overlaps with the Lake of the (Two)

Knives, which figures prominently in the

solar hymns of the New Kingdom, and

merges with that of Nun or of a pool sacred

to the sun-god, [out of which] the Pharaoh

was thought to be reborn, like that god

himself, and to be brought into close

association with him.” 239 The fiery elements seem to have been suggested by the flaming

gold of sunrise and sunset over the water.240

The great antiquity of this ritual conflict may

be judged from the circumstance that the

weapon sent by Re to overcome the dragon

Apophis is “a knife of flint (of Behdet)

brought from Behdet of the East; … the

length of the flint knife is four spans. ”241 The earliest solar temples were established,

Reymond posits, at places where the great

serpent had been overcome since that

obstacle had to be removed before the sun-

god could occupy the “Island of Fury.” 242

Figure 129. The great coiled serpent on the sand, here called the Terrible One, brings all life and progress to a halt by swallowing the hours and the water. The

solar-ship, bearing the ram-headed god protected by a good serpent, is towed over the sand after the great serpent has failed to stop its progress. Redrawn from the sarcophagus in the tomb of Seti I. Book of Gates, fourth hour, ca. 1290 B.C. Courtesy of the Trustees Sir John Soane’s Museum, London.

In our present text and its primary

archetype, Horus and his followers must overcome at the gate of the wʿb.t—the

washing place—before the sunrise can take

place. 243 It is a type of the resurrection in which, while all the universe looks on in

amazement, “the sky is opened, the earth is

opened, the doors of the Kereret [Qerert]

(the caverns of the underworld) are thrown

back wide Nekhen” so that Osiris may

“ascend to the sky upon the wing of

Thoth. ”244 These are also the gates of heaven that open in the temple,245 where the testing of the psychostasy takes place. There is no

point to forcing these gates since one who is

not qualified to pass through them will gain

nothing but confusion by doing so. Strangely,

the savage gatekeepers seem willing to listen

to reason, for in the age-old tradition even

the most savage duel was preceded by the

formality of exchanging names and stating the

issue: before he strikes, the defender of the

gate must necessarily ask who the newcomer is and what he wants—the questioning at the

gate must be as old as the gate itself since the

very purpose of gates is to allow selective

passage. 246 A satisfactory answer could avoid combat altogether: the important thing

in the Book of Breathings, as we have seen,

is to know the answer.

The battle on the waters which opens the

way for the sun to rise is but one version of

the many ritual and mythical situations in

which the sun’s rising is compared with his

breaking out of confinement in the

underworld. A dramatic conception is that of

the smashing of the gates, familiar from the

harrowing of hell literature of the early

Christians. So in Coffin Text 96: “I have

come to thee, ram of the Great Lady,

gatekeeper of the warrior lady of the gods

who guards the wicked ones, to whom the

guardians of the fields (regions of the other

world) open up. With the sword I come forth by day, overcoming mine enemies.” 247 In the earliest coronation rites, the new king had to

prevail at a battleground by the waterside,

called “the Royal Gate of the Palace. ”248

According to one study, the prince had to

prove his right to rule by forcing open the

gates of the residence. 249 “I escape all who would seize me,” says the initiate. “I shall

tear down their building and drive them from

their seats of power; I overcame their

magic.” 250 The battle by the water was explained in Plutarch’s time as the perennial

conflict between the divine life-giving

powers of water and the destructive powers

of heat and drought, represented by Apophis

as the brother of the Sun. 251

The classic combat is that between the two

brothers, Horus and Seth, to which every

ritual showdown is usually compared. Thus

when the sun-ship is finally freed from the

deadly sandbar that has halted its progress through the lower world, the rejoicing crew

hail the happy event as Horus’s victory over

Seth.252 In the Setne romance, the hero fills a boat with sand so that it will sink with him to

the underworld, and there he fights and slays

the great serpent three times and so acquires

the book of all knowledge. 253 The theme in which the journey of the sun-god through the

underworld meets opposition at every station

runs all through the Amduat, and in whatever

form he appears, the challenger is always

Seth, who “opposes the sun-god in all sorts

of forms and under various names.” 254 Both combatants figure as the leaders of their

respective hosts: “The dwellers in the duat

fight for my body against Apophis; they live

for my soul, they breathe for my body,”

while the hero in return drives out the

darkness for them and turns night into day,

doing all things for their welfare. 255

Since the sacrificial victims were enemies taken in combat, the battle itself is a

sacrificial rite. Various stations of the

Amduat are marked by sacrificial gestures,

and Hornung notes that “the punishment and

destruction of the ‘enemies’ in this world as

well counts as sacrifice to the gods. ”256 In Pyramid Text 477 §962a, Thoth as “Lord of

the Sacrifice” with his moon-shaped knife

“slaughters all who oppose the king on his

way to Osiris” and so provides sacrificial

offering. 257 The “enemy” was often dispatched in the form of a goose, fox, or

pig, human victims readily changing into

animals for the purpose—for if one creature

can substitute, so can another. 258 Thus in the

“night of the great hoeing in Busiris,” when

the followers of Seth, the adversary, were

transformed into sheep and as such were

sacrificed, “their blood was received as that

of the people of Busiris.” 259

In the fateful seventh hour, the hero meets Apophis face to face as the monster, after

drinking the river dry, lies in ambush on the

bank to finish off the helpless crew; but the

followers of Re cut the beast up with their

swords, and the journey proceeds. 260 In the eighth hour the ship is again encircled by the

Mḥn-serpent, and the painful towing forward of the vessel is a proper form of conflict. 261

In the tenth hour the serpent is confronted by

another serpent, this one wearing the hawk-

head of Horus, 262 and a regular army opposes “the adversary, Nḥȝ-ḥr” of our

Breathings text, here representing “the

primal darkness,” who tries to keep the hero

from reaching the gate of the eastern

horizon.263 With the victory, air comes to the noses of the crew, who are able to row,

having power over their breath, and air fills

the sails as the ship moves forward at

accelerating speed;264 breathing itself is a

victory, for the good wind is met by a counterwind, and there is a regular conflict

of winds.265

Plutarch gives us to understand that there

was a whole series of such fights between

Horus and Typhon and their followers,

carried out mimetically (e.g., they cut up a

rope which represents Apophis).266 But the sham battles, as Herodotus reports, could be

pretty rough.267 Some of the older versions describe the fight as a knock-down and drag-out battle in which each opponent tries to do

to the other what the other would do to

him:268 make him the sacrificial victim. The object of the initiate is to turn the tables on

those who would seize and destroy him, 269

which is another way of reversing the blows

of death: “I know the secrets of Elkab,”

which Horus used against him who wounded

him.270 Thus the climax of the Setne stories is a great battle of the magicians, which ends

up with Pharaoh inflicting on the rival false king of Ethiopia exactly the same ritual

blows with which the evil viceroy disabled

the king of Egypt in the beginning. 271 The story begins, however, with the mildest kind

of combat, a game of “fifty-two” played

between the hero and the dead owner of the

book of knowledge—but the stakes are as

deadly as those in any duel, for the loser

must remain in the underworld forever. 272

Without the element of danger and conflict,

the story of man’s redemption would be

meaningless. But like the more erotic

episodes of the garden story, it was

discretely depicted in highly ritualized and

abstract forms. The essence of the stumme

Ritual, according to Spiegel, was the

combat,273 with its original “battle episode of the storming of heaven and its cruel

victory celebration”274 put well out of the way in unreadable positions on the walls. 275

Thus this part of the initiation may sometimes be overlooked by the casual

observer—but it is always there.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 90–

93

90. O ye gods who are within the duat! Hear the voice of the Wsỉr-Wr, Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified, who has come

into your presence!

91 (5/5). There is no sin at all upon him; no

offense is held against him; no accuser

riseth against him. He liveth on Maat; he

feedeth on Maat. The gods are pleased

with everything he hath done.

92. He hath given bread to the hungry, drink

to the thirsty, clothing to the naked. He hath

made offerings to the gods, even

invocation offerings ( or funeral feasts) for those glorified ones (the deified

ancestors). There is not made

93. a report of any kind against him before all the gods ( i.e., in assembly).

Commentary: Psychostasy: The

Initiate Is Pronounced Guiltless

The most impressive fragment of the

Joseph Smith Papyri is a large drawing

depicting the testing of the dead in a court of

law—the famous psychostasy, or weighing

of the soul or heart of the dead by balancing

it in a huge set of scales against the weight of

truth (fig. 130; see color plate 5; cf. p. 252,

fig. 79). If war is the continuation of politics

by violent means, 276 the court of law for the Egyptians is the continuation of the violent

altercation between Horus and Seth by

gentler means. The Island of Fire, where Re

defeated his enemies in the beginning in

order to assume his dominion, was,

according to Kees, “at the same time the

place of judgment for the dead. The

‘accuser’ steps forth in the role of Seth, the enemy of the god,” and the ordinances of the

mysteries are equated to a trial at law.277

After Horus and Typhon fought with arms,

the contest was continued in a court of law

where, with the aid of Thoth, Typhon was

defeated, as he was in two other combats.278

After the initiate breaks out of the gates

“with violence and force, overcoming his

enemies,” he proceeds to the divine college

to settle the affair—it is not with force (as in

our society) but with law that the ultimate

decision rests.279 Even the most dignified court trial, however, was understood to

present the plaintiff and defendant as types of

Horus and Seth, respectively engaged in

their primordial bloody combat. 280 In the Amduat the court of the twelve gods tries

Osiris every day when the enemy brings

charges, justifies him, and “overthrows his

[Osiris’s] enemies” as on a fair field of

combat.281 Re also fights in the court as on the field: “Hail Re, Justified; ( mȝʿ-ḫrw) , Re, Smiter of His Enemy! Thou art Justified, O

Re, against thine enemies!” 282 Following their example, the dead “appears with his

enemies before a court of law, where he is

acquitted and they are condemned,”

whereupon the winner is represented as the

falcon, the victorious Horus, or the

triumphant ba-bird. 283 And just as the initiate is tested at the gate, so the gate was also a

court. 284

Figure 130. The court scene from Joseph Smith

Papyri IIIA–B. The defendant is being instructed by Maat herself, while an unusual symbol just under the lotus designates the place as the Hall of the Two

Maats. Behind Amentit, the waiting monster that

threatens the guilty, stands Thoth, who is recording everything. The judge is Osiris on the throne, holding

“the scepter of justice and judgment in his hand”

(Book of Abraham, Facsimile 3, fig. 1).

Reconstructed drawing, after JSP III. © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

Among the Breathings texts, Papyrus

Sensaos emphasizes the court imagery where the trial is clearly a representation of ritual

combat: “Hail Thoth! Grant that thy face be

turned toward me; justify me, even my words

against mine enemies, even as thou didst

justify Osiris against his enemies in the

presence of the great court held in

Heliopolis, on that night of the fighting to

overthrow these rebels, and the day when the

enemies of the Most High God were

smashed”; 285 “Justify my words against my enemies as thou didst the words of Osiris

against his enemies! O Lord of Light in the

great temple, … give me my mouth that I may

speak with it.” 286 Our Book of Breathings refers plainly to the trial situation when, in

lines 90–93, the aspirant is pronounced

guiltless.

Lines 90–91: “O ye gods who are within the duat! Hear the voice of the Wsỉr-Wr,

Justified, Son of Ns-pȝw.ty-tȝ.wy, Justified, who has come into your presence! There is

no sin at all upon him; no offense is held

against him; no accuser riseth against him”

Here the candidate is designated by only

two names: he is no longer “the Osiris So-

and-so” but simply Wsỉr-Wr, “Osiris the

Great”; only his personal name and that of

his father are given, and both names are

qualified by “Justified” —True of Word,

particularly appropriate at this point where

the express purpose of the rites is to

establish his mȝʿ-ḫrw. There is no mention of Horus, but the initiate is specifically

designated as the son of his father.

However ancient the trial motif, the well-

known pictures of the big pair of scales in

the court seems to be a concept of the later

period; it is a striking way of expressing the

concept of the Two Ways, which underwent

various changes of detail.287 Thus in the

famous text known as the Eloquent Peasant, the just man is repeatedly compared with a

just balance.288 Reinhard Grieshammer thinks that the picture of the weighing of the

soul was added as an afterthought by way of

illustrating the earlier Negative Confession,

which we have already met with at the

gates. 289 Also, the weighing of the soul became more and more in graphic

presentation the weighing of the heart.290 The psychostasy, very popular in the latest

period, is found represented as late as the

third century A.D.291 The picture is omitted from the Kerasher Book of Breathings for the

reasons, suggested by Budge, that it was

“thought to be superfluous” or that the artist

“was unequal to the task of painting it.” 292 It never seems to have been absolutely

indispensable and indeed is never described

in any funerary text, though it is vividly

before us in the Setne story, where Setne and

his son enter the seventh hall and see Osiris upon a golden throne, crowned with the atef,

having Anubis on his left hand and Thoth on

his right, with the gods standing on either

side, and “the balance being set in the midst

before them, they weighing the evil deeds

against the good deeds,” as Thoth writes

everything down and Anubis reports it. 293

But even in the Coffin Texts we learn that the

candidate “may now proceed to enter

heaven” after he “has passed all the tests …

and has been weighed in the balance. ”294

The seemingly casual treatment of the

psychostasy emphasizes its symbolic nature.

In the oldest funerary texts, Grieshammer has

found, there was no trial at all; no charges were brought against the candidate, 295 whose sins, at any rate, had been washed away in

the purification rites before the initiation began. 296 The weighing, moreover, was not carried out as a test of the soul itself, but

merely to determine whether statements sworn to by the initiate were true or false.297

The charges are never specific, and the

whole thing has a detached and timeless

air;298 and Junker observes that no Egyptian really thought himself in danger in the

psychostasy. 299 Indeed, it is the Breathings texts that show how unintimidated the

Egyptians were by the supposed awful

majesty of the law court. The maker of

Papyrus Louvre N. 3292, for example, takes

“surprising liberties” with the theme,

according to Nagel, as he borrows according

to his fancy from Egyptian mythology and

gives names to the judges which are not

found in any other such text.300 Whether the negative or positive aspect of one’s past

behavior was to be emphasized in such

scenes was entirely up to the taste of the

individual scribe or customer, according to

Drioton. 301 The trial idea was never very

popular with the Egyptians anyway, Grieshammer finds; they preferred the much

less risky primitive examination by the

doorkeepers. 302 This, in our Breathings text, takes the place of the trial. Yet the two ideas

of challenging monsters and fateful scales

are combined in chapter 17 of the Book of

the Dead and other texts when the eyebrows

of the grim gatekeepers become the arms of

the balance.303

In lines 90–91 of our Book of Breathings

we are first told that the subject has not only

never been convicted but has never even

been accused of any sin whatever—there has never been any question of his innocence

with respect to the crimes specified

(compare, from the Coffin Texts: “No one

denounces me; no one accuses me!”). 304 The routine categorical denial of guilt is found on

funeral stelae long before it meets us in the

Book of the Dead chapter 125; 305 and as far

back as the trial motif can be traced, the

“trial” seems to be a mere formality

amounting to no more than a categorical

statement of innocence, with no indication

whatever of possible guilt; the great scales

that stand so impressively in the courtroom

of the Two Maats are only to confirm the

legality and accuracy of statements made in

the court, 306 thus giving the accused a defense against “the possible perfidy of an

enemy.” 307

Amélineau once observed that the

judgment scenes in the Egyptian funerary

books have no real function since “le défunt

était toujours censé juste.” 308 Other studies confirm this, especially on the basis of two

things which the “accused” brings into the

courtroom with him, namely his mȝʿ-ḫrw

title and his crown of justification. The

initiate is addressed as mȝʿ-ḫrw, Justified, etc., as soon as he sets foot in the temple,

and this can only mean that he is already justified. “He who knows this name on

earth,” says the Amduat, “is as one mȝʿ-ḫrw in the court of Re who reckons up the scores

( ḥsb.t-ʿȝ.w).” 309 Permission to proceed to heaven depends on “the justification of one’s

earthly life,” a formal statement of

justification being tested by a regular court

examination. 310 The Hall of the Two Maats, where our initiation began, was itself such a

court of inquiry. 311 The mȝʿ-ḫrw of the long Breathings text is accordingly interpreted by

Stricker as a lawyer’s summary of a case

before a court and signifies a favorable

decision for the defendant, whose part the

judge now actively takes. 312

On acquittal, the defendant, according to

ancient custom, received a crown.313 If mȝʿ-ḫrw means “justified by acclamation,” then the crown is “the visible symbol of [that]

exclamation. ”314 Its origin was not funerary,

according to Derchain. 315 It is remarkable, Stricker observes, that the people who

owned the Breathings texts did not wait for

the final verdict of Thoth but crowned

themselves while still on earth as mummies

—they enter the next world already

crowned.316 The flower-wreath crowns worn by all the members of the Soter family

were crowns of justification,’ bestowed on

Osiris and the dead as signs of their triumph

in the tribunal on the other side” and are the

equivalent of the title mȝʿ-ḫrw. 317 Hans Bonnet finds it significant that olive leaves

prevail in the crowns as well as in the

bouquets buried with the Egyptian dead. In

the “chapters of the crown” from the earlier

literature, Thoth is supplicated to justify the

candidate against his enemies as he once did

for Osiris.318 A plurality of crowns suggests to Jean Capart that the dead may have had to

undergo a special trial just before burial,

independent of the trial to come before the

tribunal of Osiris. 319 The “crown of justification” is not a typical crown but a

band of cloth substituting for a modest

wreath,320 which was tied on. 321 It survives in the imagery of the New Testament.322

Figure 131. A most unusual psychostasy scene, in that it shows the subject actually in the custody of the monster Aamut, who bears the sacrificial knife! Let us hope that the document under the victim’s arm will get him through. P. Louvre N. 3092 (BD 125). After Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, pl. CXXXVI.

The most arresting figure in the

psychostasy or judgment scenes is that of the

monster Aamut , who crouches, waiting to

seize the defendant should he be found guilty

(fig. 131). The terrifying creature has the

relentlessly efficient head and jaws of a crocodile, the awesome mane of the fierce

and aggressive lion, the forelegs of the swift

cheetah that nothing can outrun, and the

massive and immovable hind part and hind

legs of a hippopotamus. The absurd

combination banishes any illusion of reality,

but no one could fail to get the symbolism of

it. No drawing ever shows this fabulous

creature performing its dire office, and only

in the Setne story are we told how she seizes

the wicked and “does not allow him to

breathe ever again. ”323 From this it would appear that her office is not to seize and

destroy but to frighten. Even the terrifying

Apophis in the Amduat serves that function

primarily: “zu einem wirklichem Kampf

kommt es gar nicht. ” 324 The fifty-two gods who sit in the Hall of the Two Maats are “the

watchers of evil things, who drink blood on

the day of judgment in the presence of Wn-

Nfr.” 325 In Papyrus Ani it is twelve judges who sit on thrones above the law court. 326 If bogies don’t frighten anyone, death does; and

the day of trial, Grieshammer notes, is

identified with the day of dead, the judgment

day, the day of vindication, of triumph, of

coronation.327 It is the dies irae, or day of wrath, which no one can take lightly. The

Negative Confession and the mock trial are

no mere game of make-believe, for in the end

the existence of all things rests on maat—

what is just, righteous, true, proper, and

good.328

Righteousness and Morality

Line 91: “He liveth on Maat; he feedeth on Maat. The gods are pleased with everything

he hath done”

In the case of Maat, as we have seen, such

a diet is possible; 329 it is the ultimate stamp

of righteousness and integrity. To live and feed on Maat is to be wholly true and upright

by nature, unaffected and without pretense—

the ideal of Akhenaton. The final vote of

approval is that the gods are pleased in their

hearts (“joyful of heart”) with what he has

done—well done, thou good and faithful

servant!

Line 92: “He hath given bread to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, clothing to the naked. He

hath made offerings to the gods, even

invocation offerings ( or funeral feasts) for those glorified ones (the deified ancestors)”

Compare this with a Hebrew declaration

of the dead: “I shared my bread with the

poor. I wrought godliness; all my days I kept

truth. ”330 Here are the first two commandments, on which hang all the rest:

reverence to Deity and charity toward one’s

fellowmen, living and dead; respect alike for

what is above and what is below. As de Horrack observes, this section “bears the

stamp of a truly religious sentiment and

contains moral maxims, whose striking

agreement with the precepts of the Jewish

lawgiver and those of the Christ has already

been pointed out by Egyptologists.” 331 The Egyptian, Paul Barguet notes, had a sound

and sincere regard for true moral values; “he

would never think of deceiving by any

artifices a divinity such as Re or Osiris, the

very incarnation of justice and truth,” and

(contrary to the image that has been

diligently cultivated in our time) “he dreaded

the malicious spirit of black magic.” 332 The principle of ḥms.wt guaranteed for the

Egyptians “that every man receive the fate

which he has deserved by his actions. ”333

Lines 92–93: “There is not made a report of any kind against him before all the gods ( i.e.,

in assembly)”

As the last act of the funeral, the whole

community is invited to raise any final

objections, if such there be. Barguet holds

that this episode is an appendage to the Book

of the Dead proper, being chapters 191–

92. 334 Yet this step is the unfailing victory and triumph motif with which all major

ceremonies conclude. From chapter 163 on,

the Book of the Dead is all the triumphant

imagery of the coronation at Heliopolis.

Chapter 192 is a true harrowing of hell: “the

double gates … are opened for thee, the

gates … are smashed for thee” —a concept

going back to Pyramid Text 462a–b. 335

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 93–

97

93. … (Spoken by the entire assembly?): Let

him enter into the duat, none opposing. Let him attend (follow) Osiris, along with the

gods of the

94. lower regions (caverns), being praised

among the living and deified among the

proven ones. Grant that he live; grant that

his ba may live; let

95. his ba be received into whatever place it chooseth; let his Certificate of Breathing

be duly recognized (received). Grant that

he may go on (make) breathing along with

this, his ba, in (?)336

96 (5/10). the duat, along with the making of whatever transformations ( ḫprw) his heart

may be inclined (given) to, along with ( or

like) the dwellers in the west. And grant

that his ba may go about whithersoever it

pleaseth, whenever it happens to be living

upon

97. the earth, for all time and throughout all

eternity. The end.

Commentary: The Initiate Is

Admitted to the Duat

Here is the request for (or granting of)

final clearance. The preceding section was a

series of flat declarations. The change to the

imperative mood implies another speaker,

the opening words “let him enter” being most

appropriate to the gods to whom the petition

and statement of worthiness have just been

made. Whether this is the petition or the

actual granting of the petition is, however, a

quibble since there can be no possible doubt

but that the petition is granted. In the

Kerasher version it is Thoth, Hathor, Maat,

or all three who say, “Come, pass thou on

( bs=k, ‘be thou initiated’) to the place where thy father is[,] that he may place thee among

the divine favoured ones.” 337

Lines 93–94: “Let him enter into the duat, none opposing. Let him attend (follow)

Osiris, along with the gods of the lower

regions (caverns), being praised among the living and deified among the proven ones”

According to this, existence may continue

on three levels, as expressed in the

statement: “Thy ba lives in heaven with Re, thy ka is divine in the presence of the gods.

Thy body is in the underworld with Osiris;

thy sʿḥ is radiant among the transfigured ones ( ȝḫw). ”338 The word we have rendered

“sanctified,” nṯr.yt, implies deification and

“may reflect the restoration of divine powers

or status”; 339 indeed, it is exaltation and return to a former glory. The emphasis on

mingling on a level with exalted beings

recalls the homecoming scene from the early

Christian hymn of The Pearl,340 as well as Book of the Dead chapter 17: “O ye standing

there, give me your hands! For I am one of

your own number! ”341 and Pyramid Text 306: How lovely to see! How pleasing to behold!’

say they, namely the gods, when this god

ascends to the sky, when you ascend to the sky with your power upon you. … There

come to you the gods the Souls of Pe, the

gods the Souls of Nekhen, the gods who are

in the sky, and the gods who are on earth.

They make supports for you upon their

arms. ”342 In some passages of the Coffin Texts, great emphasis is laid on rejoining

one’s family and associates, for example,

“The Uniting of a Family in the Next World. I

am Atum. … I have received and entered

into my kingdom. … I advanced on my feet, I

stretched forth my two arms; heaven was

perfect for me; the divine council was

satisfied. They granted that I should reunite

with them. So my family, my children, my

brothers, my sisters, and my dear friends

everywhere were included.” 343 “Thou hast gathered together those who are in heaven

and on earth” is almost reminiscent of the

“gathering” motif in Israel.

Lines 94–97: “grant that his ba may live; let his ba be received into whatever place it

chooseth; let his Certificate of Breathing be

duly recognized (received). Grant that he

may go on (make) breathing along with this,

his ba, in (?) the duat, along with the making of whatever transformations ( ḫprw) his heart may be inclined (given) to, along with ( or

like) the dwellers in the west. And grant that

his ba may go about whithersoever it

pleaseth, whenever it happens to be living

upon the earth, for all time and throughout all

eternity”

Here the Book of Breathings finishes its

business. The passing of gates is definitely

related to breathing, the gates themselves

being sometimes thought of as respiratory

passages. The first hour of the Amduat

concludes: “I have come … that I might let

my members breathe, that they might be

raised up … and let Osiris Head of the

Westerners breathe as sfg-ỉrw. … Jubilation before thee who causest the transfigured

ones to breathe when thou reachest the gate”

of ẖr.t-nṯr.344

In this section the dead qualifies as a

“living ba, ” that expression denoting “the quality of divinity par excellence, the

eternal.” 345 The “living” is an epithet applied by the Egyptians “to one who has

been redeemed.” “He casts his sins to earth

and so purifies himself and arises on the

horizon like Sothis.” He is not one who has

never died, but one who has died and

overcome death in the resurrection. 346 It is only by becoming “a living ba” that one is finally free from all limitations of time and

place and can take any form one pleases. The

forms taken by the living ba are its ḫprw from the verb ḫpr, which can mean “to be”

as well as “to become, exist, happen,” and

just as the gods can share their ba s with each

other, so “gods who have their ḫprw” in another god are that god. 347 Thus many gods, though created and distinct from Ptah, are,

through their ḫprw, manifestations of him and identical with him. 348 Ḫpr signifies the moment of transition or state of change, the

great god Khepri is just ready to be born. 349

In spite of the changing of ḫprw in one’s

preexistent state, the individual always

maintains his unique identity as his proper

ḫpr. 350 The deliberate distortion by Jewish and Christian polemicists represented the

Egyptian use of images as the grossest

materialism, whereas the Egyptians

themselves held that an image was only a

reminder of a god, and its material only dead

stuff.351 The Egyptians distinguished various forms of being with a “Feinheit und

Klarheit” 352 far surpassing modern thought; this is seen in the various aspects of the

pharaoh, who is a person ( ḥm,

“Leiblichkeit”) but also a power— ny-sw.t, nb, ỉtỉ (“king, lord, sovereign,” respectively)

—acquiring two natures at his coronation

and undergoing a metamorphosis at every

rite of passage, passing from being the son of

Re in life to a state of pure divinity at his

death. 353 Changes in life forms were more important to the Egyptians than to us, as they

lived much closer to nature; and indeed,

those marvelous changes—of the human

embryo, tadpoles, caterpillars, etc.—remain

an unexplained mystery. 354 Thus the cocoon of the nymph of the scarabaeus beetle, the

Egyptian sign for ḫpr, represents “the soul, the immortal principle of eternal

renewal.” 355 “Coming into being” is the fundamental concept of ḫpr, and in the

creation story of the “Book of Knowing the

ḫprw of Re,” the word occurs seven times in one line, each time with a different

connotation, though all dealing with

creation.356

Line 97: “The end”

The expression ỉw=f pw means “literally

perhaps: this is it arrives.” 357 At the end of texts it means “it is finished. ”358 Raymond Faulkner renders it at the end of the Songs of

Isis and Nephthys portion of Papyrus

Bremner-Rhind as, “It is at an end. ”359 Baer gives it, “Here ends the Breathing Permit of

Hôr,” 360 providing an excellent illustration of the leeway that must be left to a translator

since the three words in the text do not

include “Hor,” “breathing,” or “permit.”

Naturally “the end” placed at the end of

Ivanhoe really means “Here endeth the tale of Ivanhoe,” and if the reader might miss the

point, it is perfectly proper to add the

explanatory words.

Notes

1. Wolfgang Helck, “Die Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” ArOr 20 (1952): 79.

2. Hermann Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien (Totenbuch Kapitel 69 und 70) (Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1954), 31.

3. Joachim Spiegel, Das Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1971), 92.

4. Hermann Junker, “Die Osirisreligion und der Erlösungsgedanke bei den Ägyptern,” in Internationale Woche für Religions-Ethnologie (Paris: Geuthner, 1926), 289.

5. See Winfried Barta, “Zur Verteilung der 12 Nachtstunden des Amduat in Grabe Tuthmosis III,” JEOL 7/21 (1969–

70): 164.

6. Leonard H. Lesko, The Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), 20–21.

7. Junker, “Osirisreligion und der Erlösungsgedanke bei den Ägyptern,” 276, 289.

8. Junker, “Osirisreligion und der Erlösungsgedanke bei den Ägyptern,” 289.

9. Herman te Velde, “The God Heka in Egyptian Theology,”

JEOL 7/21 (1969–70): 186, emphasis added.

10. Te Velde, “The God Heka in Egyptian Theology,” 186.

11. Hermann Junker, Pyramidenzeit: Das Wesen der altägyptischen Religion (Zürich: Benziger, 1949), 105–

6.

12. Siegfried Morenz, Ägyptische Religion (Stuttgart:

Kohlhammer, 1960), 140–41.

13. Claas J. Bleeker, “Guilt and Purification in Ancient Egypt,” Numen 13 (1966): 81–82.

14. Bleeker, “Guilt and Purification in Ancient Egypt,” 84.

15. See Gertrud Thausing, Sein und Werden: Versuch einer Ganzheitsschau der Religion des Pharaonenreiches (Vienna: Stiglmayr, 1971), 123.

16. Klaus Koch, Ratlos vor der Apokalyptik (Gütersloh: Mohn, 1970), 103–11; Hugh W. Nibley, “Tenting, Toll, and Taxing,” Western Political Quarterly 19 (1966): 599–630, reprinted in The Ancient State: The Rulers and the Ruled, CWHN 10:33–98.

17. A. E. Housman, “Could Man Be Drunk For Ever,” in Last Poems (London: Richards, 1922), 26.

18. Erik Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971), 174; English trans., Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many, trans. John Baines (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1982), 179; cf. 2 Nephi 9:7.

19. Omar Khayyám, Rubáiyát, stanza 38, trans. Edward Fitzgerald (Garden City, N.Y.: Garden City Books, 1952), 59.

20. Henri Frankfort, Ancient Egyptian Religion (1948; reprint, New York: Harper, 1961), 73.

21. Frankfort, Ancient Egyptian Religion, 73–75.

22. Max Guilmot, “La signification des métamorphoses du défunt en Égypte ancienne,” RHR 175 (1969): 9.

23. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 217; Reinhard

Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1970), 70.

24. For example, E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Dead; Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, A.nhai, Kerāsher and Netchemet (London: British Museum, 1899), pl. 2.

25. Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zur altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Der dramatische

Ramesseumpapyrus: Ein Spiel zur Thronbesteigung des Königs (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928), 96.

26. See Nibley, “Tenting, Toll, and Taxing,” 609–11, reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN 10:46–48.

27. Cf. the colorful parade in P. Leiden T 32 5/17–24, in Bruno H. Stricker, “De Egyptische Mysteriën: Pap.

Leiden T 32,” OMRO 34 (1953): 23–24.

28. On entering the company of the gods, see below, commentary to lines 93–94, pp. 408–9.

29. Erik Hornung, Das Amduat: Die Schrift des verborgenen Raumes (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1963–

67), 1:18; 2:32–33.

30. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:13–22; 2:28–29.

31. Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca (Library) 1.92.

32. Jacques J. Clère, “Un passage de la stèle du général Antef,” BIFAO 30 (1931): 427.

33. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:4.

34. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:5; cf. Howard Carter and Alan H. Gardiner, “The Tomb of Ramesses IV and the Turin Plan of a Royal Tomb,” JEA 4 (1917): 147; Kurt Sethe,

“Die Türteile bnš und ʿrj.t,” ZÄS 67 (1931): 115–17.

35. Alexandre Piankoff, “Les deux papyrus ‘mythologiques’

de Her-Ouben au Musée du Caire,” ASAE 49 (1949): 137.

36. BD 125, in Adriaan de Buck, Egyptian Readingbook: Exercises and Middle Egyptian Texts, 2nd ed. (Leiden: Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten, 1963), 121.

37. Sethe, “Die Türteile bnš und ʿrj.t,” 115–17; Gertrud Thausing and Traudl Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch (Papyrus Reinisch) der

Papyrussammlung der Österreichischen

Nationalbibliothek (Cairo: Österreichisches Kulturinstitut, 1969), 38.

38. Carter and Gardiner, “Tomb of Ramesses IV,” 147.

39. BD 125, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 39.

40. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 18–20, in Jean-Claude Goyon, Le Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279 (Cairo: IFAO, 1966), 36–39.

41. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 71.

42. Wilhelm Czermak, “Vom großen Gedanken Ägyptens,”

Archiv für ägyptische Archäologie 1 (1938): 208–9; BD 22.

43. Zohar, Vayer a 103b, in Harry Sperling and Maurice Simon, The Zohar, 2nd ed. (London: Soncino, 1984), 1:332.

44. Gerardus van der Leeuw, “The SUMBOLA [ Symbola]

in Firmicus Maternus,” Egyptian Religion 1 (1933): 69.

45. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:167.

46. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:11; 2:24–25, 40.

47. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:20.

48. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:12–13; 2:24–25.

49. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:167.

50. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:21; 2:39.

51. Cf. Étienne Drioton, “Portes de l’hades et portes du paradis,” Bulletin de la Société d’archéologie copte 9

(1943): 59, 66–67.

52. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:29–30.

53. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:37; 2:55.

54. Cf. Philippe Derchain, Le Papyrus Salt 825 (B.M.

10051): Rituel pour la conservation de la vie en Égypte (Brussels: Palais des Académies, 1965), 1:7.

55. CT 75, in Adriaan de Buck, The Egyptian Coffin Texts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935–61),

1:398c–402a; Jan Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS

99 (1972): 50.

56. See the many texts in Philippe Derchain, “La couronne de la justification: Essai d’analyse d’un rite ptolémaïque,”

CdE 30 (1955): 225–87, in which the initiate resorts to force.

57. Diodorus, Library 1.51, cited in Richard Lepsius, Älteste Texte des Todtenbuches nach Sarkophagen des

altägyptischen Reichs im Berliner Museum (Berlin: Hertz, 1867), 53.

58. P. Ani 15, in E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the

Dead: The Papyrus of Ani, Scribe and Treasurer of the Temples of Egypt, About B.C. 1450 (New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1913), 2:497–98; 3: pl. 20.

59. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 69 and 70

note h.

60. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd rev. ed.

(Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1957), 170–72.

61. Hugh W. Nibley, “Sparsiones,” Classical Journal 40

(1945): 524–26, reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN

10:152–54.

62. Kenneth A. Kitchen, review of Aufbau und Bedeutung der altägyptischen Opferformel, by Winfried Barta, Or 41 (1972): 130.

63. Kitchen, review of Aufbau und Bedeutung, 131.

64. Raymond O. Faulkner, A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1962), 322.

65. Erik Hornung, Altägyptische Höllvorstellungen (Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1968), 13.

66. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 50–55, 58–61b, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 51–52, 54–62.

67. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 115; for more on food offerings, see above, commentary to lines 26–27, pp. 238–43.

68. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:11.

69. For example, see Gerald A. Wainwright, The Sky Religion of Egypt: Its Antiquity and Effects (London: Cambridge University Press, 1938).

70. This is where Abraham comes in; see Hugh W. Nibley,

“A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price,” IE, November 1969, 116–20; June 1969, 127–28, 130;

March 1970, 84, 86–87, 91–93; and April 1970, 80–84, with portions reprinted in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN

14:182–97, 319, 325, 336–39, 346–60.

71. Eugène Lefébure, “Le sacrifice humaine d’après les rites de Busiris et d’Abydos,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed.

Gaston Maspero, BE 36 (Paris: Leroux, 1915), 3:272.

72. Wainwright, Sky Religion of Egypt, 60–61.

73. P. Bremner-Rhind 5/5–9, in E. A. Wallis Budge, “On the Hieratic Papyrus of Nesi-Amsu, a Scribe in the Temple of Amen-Rā at Thebes, about B.C. 305,” Archaeologia 52 (1890): 464–65.

74. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:343–44; pl. 1.

75. Émile Suys, “Les messagers des dieux,” Egyptian Religion 2 (1934): 131.

76. Suys, “Les messagers des dieux,” 126–27.

77. Suys, “Les messagers des dieux,” 127–28.

78. CT 114, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:131–33.

79. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:60–61; 2:71.

80. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 114.

81. Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” 58–59; and Jan Zandee, Death as an Enemy: According to Ancient Egyptian Conceptions, trans. Mrs. W. F. Klasens (Leiden: Brill, 1960), 184–86.

82. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 69–70.

83. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:397b–399b;

Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” 49–50.

84. CT 341, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 4:343–44.

85. CT 340, 343, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 4:342, 349–50.

86. CT 335, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 4:282.

87. CT 335, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 4:283.

88. Étienne Drioton, review of The Egyptian Coffin Texts, vol. 4, by Adriaan de Buck, BiOr 10 (1953): 167.

89. CT 146, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:205.

90. P. Nebseni, BM 9900, in Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:395.

91. László Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 103–4.

92. Winfried Barta, “Zum scheinbaren Bedeutungswandel des Seth in den Pyramidentexten,” JEOL 7/20 (1967–

68): 44–45, 48.

93. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 126.

94. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, July 1969, 97.

95. Guilmot, “La signification des métamorphoses du défunt,” 7–11, quotation on 8.

96. Robert Graves, The Greek Myths (Baltimore: Penguin, 1955), 1:179–80.

97. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 22.

98. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 19.

99. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 20–21.

100. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, July 1969, 102–3.

101. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 25.

102. Barta, “Zum scheinbaren Bedeutungswandel des Seth,”

48.

103. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 20.

104. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 20.

105. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 19.

106. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 21.

107. BD 178; CT 312, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 4:68–86; cf. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, August 1969, 75–

80.

108. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 20.

109. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 19–20.

110. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 7, 21.

111. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 6–7.

112. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 20.

113. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 26, emphasis added.

114. Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien, 25.

115. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 145; see also Mircea Eliade, “L’initiation et le monde moderne,” in Initiation, ed. Claas J. Bleeker (Leiden: Brill, 1965), 3–5.

116. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 77.

117. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 106–7.

118. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 109.

119. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of Opening the Mouth (London: Kegan, Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1909), 1:220.

120. Nibley, “New Look,” IE, January 1969, 26–33; February 1969, 64–67; March 1969, 76–84; March 1970, 84–94; April 1970, 79–95, with portions reprinted in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:319–81.

121. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata 1.15, in PG 8:768.

122. Constant de Wit, “La circoncision chez les anciens égyptiens,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 43.

123. Hans Bonnet, Reallexikon der ägyptischen Religionsgeschichte, 2nd ed. (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971), 109–10.

124. Encyclopaedia Judaica, 5:568–76, s.v.

“circumcision.”

125. Zohar, Beshalah 66b, in Sperling, Simon, and Levertoff, Zohar, 3:208.

126. Jack M. Sasson, “Circumcision in the Ancient Near East,” JBL 85 (1966): 476, emphasis in original.

127. Gerhard Fecht, “Ägyptische Zweifel am Sinn des Opfers,” ZÄS 100 (1973): 15–16; de Wit, “Circoncision chez les anciens égyptiens,” 48 n. 63.

128. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride (Of Isis and Osiris) 18; Theodor Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris (Prague: Orientalisches Institut, 1940), 1:99–103.

129. BD 17; de Wit, “Circoncision chez les anciens égyptiens,” 42.

130. André Caquot, “Pour une étude de l’initiation dans l’ancien Israël,” in Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 123.

131. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 67.

132. “Livre du Combat d’Adam,” in J.-P. Migne, Dictionnaire des apocryphes (Paris: Migne, 1856–58), 1:330.

133. [There is some question about how the verbs in this series, which are written as though they were older

negative future forms, are to be understood at the time the papyrus was written. They can either be taken as negative future forms ( nn sḏm=f forms), or, taking nn as a miswriting for n as is also common at this time period, as negative past forms ( n sḏm=f forms). Nibley has taken them as negative past forms—eds.]

134. For more on the gate, see above, commentary to lines 69–72, pp. 373–76.

135. See the vivid passage in Zohar, Vayera 103b, in Sperling and Simon, Zohar, 1:332.

136. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 45.

137. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 176; English trans., 182; cf. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 198–201.

138. Suys, “Messagers des dieux,” 136–37.

139. Émile Amélineau, L’enfer égyptien et l’enfer virgilien: Étude de mythologie comparée (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1914), 16.

140. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 53.

141. S. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire de l’anté-diluvien à Sumer-Babylone: La familiarité divine originelle (Athens: BAOA, 1961), 435.

142. Wainwright, Sky Religion of Egypt, 78–82; cf. Daniel 4:20–22.

143. Hugh W. Nibley, Since Cumorah: The Book of Mormon in the Modern World (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1967), 238–39, reprinted in Since Cumorah,

CWHN 7:209.

144. Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen, 12.

145. See Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 33–35.

146. Max Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos: Ein Beitrag zur ägyptischen Religions- und Literaturgeschichte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929), 58.

147. Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen, 12.

148. Jewish Encyclopedia, 6:333, s.v. “hekalot rabbati; hekalot zu-ṭarti.”

149. Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos, 27–28 §18 lines 21–23.

150. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:82–83; 2:98.

151. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:211 and fourth hour (Schematische) at the end of the volume.

152. Suys, “Messagers des dieux,” 126–27.

153. Evangelium Mariae (Gospel of Mary) 15–16.

154. H. Maldwyn Hughes, “The Greek Apocalypse of Baruch, or 3 Baruch: Introduction,” in APOT 2:529.

155. Marie Gothein, “Die Todsünden,” Archiv für Religionswissenschaft 10 (1907): 416–84.

156. Bleeker, “Guilt and Purification in Ancient Egypt,” 81–

82.

157. George Nagel, “Un papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire (Louvre 3292 [inv.]),” BIFAO 29 (1929): 97–98.

158. Étienne Drioton, “Contributions à l’étude du chapitre

CXXV du Livre des Morts: Les confessions négatives,”

in Recueil d’études égyptologiques dédiées à la mémoire de Jean-François Champollion (Paris: Champion, 1922), 559, 564.

159. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

87.

160. Françoise de Cenival, “Les associations dans les temples égyptiens d’après les données fournies par les papyrus démotiques,” in REHR, 17.

161. Oswald H. E. Burmester, “Egyptian Mythology in the Coptic Apocrypha,” Or 7 (1938): 364–66.

162. Jacques Dupont, Béatitudes’ égyptiennes,” Biblica 47

(1966): 221.

163. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 39.

164. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 50.

165. Klaus Baer, “The Breathing Permit of Hôr: A Translation of the Apparent Source of the Book of

Abraham,” Dialogue 3/3 (1968): 125.

166. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 109.

167. Homer, Iliad 1.37–47; P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 42–43, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 47–50, bears this out.

168. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 33 n. 3.

169. Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 28–43.

170. Étienne Drioton, “Une statue prophylactique de Ramsès III,” ASAE 39 (1939): 70–71.

171. Nibley, “Tenting, Toll, and Taxing,” 615–19, reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN 10:53–57.

172. Cf. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 30.

173. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:167; 2:161.

174. Iamblichus, De mysteriis (On the Mysteries) 6.7, in Theodor Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis

Aegyptiacae (Bonn: Marcus and Weber, 1922), 500–

501.

175. 1QS II, 12–18.

176. P. Sensaos 9, in Bruno H. Stricker, “De Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” OMRO 23 (1942): 37, 40.

177. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 27, 49.

178. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:116.

179. P. Sȩkowski 3/3, in Albertyna Szczudłowska, “Pyramid Texts Preserved on Sȩkowski Papyrus,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 26–27.

180. Wb 1:578.

181. Siegfried Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 24.

182. Alan H. Gardiner, “The Coronation of King Ḥaremḥab,” JEA 39 (1953): 14.

183. Zandee, Death as an Enemy, 300.

184. Philippe-Jacques de Horrack, “Le Livre des Respirations d’après les manuscrits du Musée du

Louvre,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Philippe Virey and Gaston Maspero, BE 17 (Paris: Leroux, 1907), 132,

citing Chabas on this line: “je n’ai pas été un producteur

de réclamations, d’appels; je n’ai pas été exigeant.”

185. PT 539 §1305c; Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 24.

186. Amélineau, L’enfer égyptien et l’enfer virgilien, 10.

187. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 302–3.

188. BD 125, in Lepsius, Todtenbuch der Ägypter, pl. 157.

189. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 34.

190. Wb 1:227.

191. Baer, “Breathing Permit of Hôr,” 125.

192. E. A. Wallis Budge, Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection (New York: Dover, 1973), 1:62.

193. Wb 5:58, 62; de Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” 132.

194. Wb 5:58; Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 4.

195. Wb 2:290.

196. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:55.

197. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:57; cf. P. Bremner-Rhind 32/31, in Raymond O. Faulkner, The Papyrus Bremner-Rhind (British Museum No. 10188) (Brussels: FERE, 1933), 90.

198. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:123.

199. Wb 2:290.

200. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 240.

201. Wb 3:247; note ideogram.

202. Short Amduat, seventh hour, line 177–94, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:16–17.

203. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 105; cf. English trans., 115.

204. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 61–76.

205. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:117.

206. Nibley, “New Look,” Improvement Era, July 1969, 97–

105.

207. Cited in de Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” 132–33.

208. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

54.

209. Gerald A. Wainwright, “Letopolis,” JEA 18 (1932): 167.

210. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 424; Wainwright, “Letopolis,”

159–62.

211. Wainwright, Sky Religion of Egypt, 22.

212. Heinrich K. Brugsch, Dictionnaire hiéroglyphique et démotique (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1867–82), 4:1160; de Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” 133, renders it

“corrupt, to practice corruption.”

213. Wb 3:418–19.

214. Hornung, Altägyptische Höllenvorstellungen, 21–29.

215. CT 711, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 6:342.

216. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:378–80; Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” 48, 52.

217. Lesko, Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, 131.

218. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:109–10.

219. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:6–7, 10.

220. P. Salt 825 5/1, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:5*.

221. P. Salt 825 7/3–4, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:9*.

222. P. Salt 825 8/6–7, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825,

2:11*.

223. P. Salt 825 9/2, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:11*–

12*.

224. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 175–77; English trans., 180–82.

225. E. A. E. Reymond, The Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1969), 13, 25, 107, 209, etc.

226. BD 115, in Hermann Kees, “Die Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” ZÄS 78 (1942): 44; cf.

Jürgen Trumpf, “Stadtgründung und Drachenkampf,”

Hermes 86 (1958): 149–54.

227. BD 17, in Kees, “Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” 44.

228. Alfred Rupp, “Geschichte und Seinszusammenhang,”

BiOr 26 (1969): 24–25.

229. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:116.

230. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 42–43, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 47–50.

231. P. Sensaos 8–9, in Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,”

37.

232. Raymond O. Faulkner, “The ‘Cannibal Hymn’ from the Pyramid Texts,” JEA 10 (1924): 98.

233. CT 567, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 6:166–67.

234. Günther Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten (Jena: Diederichs, 1915), 129.

235. Hermann Junker, Die Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien nach den Inschriften von Dendera,

Edfu und Philae (Vienna: Hölder, 1910), 108.

236. Kees, “Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” 45–46.

237. Émile Chassinat, “Le livre de protéger la barque divine,” RT 16 (1894): 115–17; Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten, 128.

238. Kees, “Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” 47.

239. Cf. Aylward M. Blackman, “Some Notes on the Ancient Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead,” JEA 5

(1918): 118.

240. Kees, “Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” 45.

241. P. Salt 825 6/5, in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 2:7*.

242. Reymond, Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, 233–35.

243. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 120.

244. P. Sȩkowski 22/8, 23/1, in Szczudłowska, “Pyramid Texts Preserved on Sȩkowski Papyrus,” 62.

245. Gertrud Thausing, “Der ägyptische Schicksalsbegriff,”

MDAIK 8 (1939): 63; Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 225–26; English trans., 229.

246. See Nibley, “Tenting, Toll, and Taxing,” 619–21, reprinted in Ancient State, CWHN 10:57–60.

247. CT 96, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:84–85.

248. Wilhelm Spiegelberg, “Ein Bruchstück des Bestattungsrituals der Apisstiere,” ZÄS 56 (1920): 18–

22.

249. Peter Munro, “Bemerkungen zu einem Sedfest-Relief in der Stadtmauer von Kairo,” ZÄS 86 (1961): 71.

250. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:400–402; Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” 50.

251. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 36.

252. P. Louvre N. 3129 C/12–17, in Siegfried Schott, Urkunden mythologischen Inhalts (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929), 13–15.

253. P. Setna I 3/28–37, in Francis Ll. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis: The Sethon of

Herodotus and the Demotic Tales of Khamuas

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1900), 24–25, 100–103.

254. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:15.

255. Amduat, second hour, concluding text (following variant), in Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:42–43.

256. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:45–46; 1:25–26.

257. Schott, “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger Schriften,” 23.

258. For example, see P. Setna I 3/26–33, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis, 23–24, 98–103.

259. Paul Barguet, Le Livre des Morts des anciens égyptians (Paris: Cerf, 1967), 66, discussing BD 18.

260. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:139–40.

261. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:141; 2:145.

262. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:174.

263. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:172–76; 2:168.

264. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:176–77.

265. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:184.

266. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 19.

267. For overcoming opposition on the water, see above, commentary to lines 21–22, pp. 222–27.

268. CT 149, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:239–42; cf. Sinuhe B 144–47 (P. Berlin 3022), in Adolf Erman, Literarische Texte des Mittleren Reiches (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1908–9), 2: Taf. 9–9a.

269. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:396–404; Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” 50.

270. CT 158, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:349–50.

271. P. Setna II 4/2–5/9, 5/29–37, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis, 54–58, 60–61, 174–85, 190–

93.

272. P. Setna I 4/27–33, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis, 30–32, 116–19; the “Green Knight”

motif.

273. Joachim Spiegel, “Das Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” ASAE 53 (1956): 413–17.

274. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 416; PT 254–56 §§276–303.

275. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 417.

276. See Karl von Clausewitz, On War, trans. J. J. Graham, rev. ed. (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1956), 3:97.

277. Kees, “Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten und im Totenbuch,” 49.

278. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 19; also Alan H. Gardiner, The Library of A. Chester Beatty: … The Chester Beatty Papyri, No. 1 (London: Oxford University Press,

1931), 13–26 and pls. 1–16.

279. CT 96, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:84–87.

280. Grieshammer, Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 114.

281. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:155.

282. Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:58.

283. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:401; CT

149, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:228–45, cited in Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” 61.

284. Carter and Gardiner, “Tomb of Ramesses IV,” 147.

285. P. Sensaos 15–16, in Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 38.

286. P. Sensaos 19–20, in Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 39.

287. See Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” 96–97.

288. The Eloquent Peasant, Bauer (B1) (P. Berlin 3023), in Erman, Literarische Texte des Mittleren Reiches, 1: Taf. 6–22.

289. Grieshammer, Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 112.

290. Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” 97.

291. Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” 96.

292. Budge, Book of the Dead: Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, A.nhai, Kerāsher and Netchemet, 34.

293. P. Setna II 2/4–6, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis, 46, 153.

294. CT 44, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:181.

295. CT 21, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:59.

296. CT 22, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:65.

297. CT 20, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:56.

298. CT 33, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:113.

299. Junker, “Osirisreligion und der Erlösungsgedanke bei den Ägyptern,” 289.

300. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

29.

301. Drioton, “Confessions négatives,” 562.

302. Grieshammer, Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 112.

303. Grieshammer, Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 47; Suys, “Messagers des dieux,” 126–27.

304. CT 40, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:173.

305. Drioton, “Confessions négatives,” 545–64.

306. Grieshammer, Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 56.

307. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 21.

308. Amélineau, L’enfer égyptien et l’enfer virgilien, 10.

309. Amduat, ninth hour, introduction, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:154.

310. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 377–

78; cf. PT 257–58, 260, 278 §§304–11, 316–23, 419.

311. PT 260 §317a.

312. Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 44 n. 1.

313. Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 45, citing 2

Timothy 4:8, and P. Chester Beatty I 16/7, in Gardiner, Library of A. Chester Beatty, pl. 16–16a.

314. Derchain, “Couronne de la justification,” 231–32.

315. Derchain, “Couronne de la justification,” 234.

316. Stricker, “Lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,” 31.

317. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 121.

318. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 44; BD 18–20.

319. Jean Capart, review of “De lijkpapyrus van Sensaos,”

by Bruno H. Stricker, CdE 17 (1943): 266.

320. Derchain, “Couronne de la justification,” 226–30.

321. Derchain, “Couronne de la justification,” 243.

322. Derchain, “Couronne de la justification,” 252–53.

323. P. Setna II 2/7, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis, 153; cf. 47.

324. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:139.

325. BD 125, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, Taf. 3.

326. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 3: pl. 3.

327. See Grieshammer, “Der Zeitpunkt des Gerichtes,” in Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, 107–15.

328. Dieter Müller, “I Am Isis,” review of Ich bin Isis, by Jan Bergman, OLZ 67 (1972): 122.

329. See above, commentary to lines 38–41, pp. 250–52.

330. Testament of Issachar 7:5, in APOT, 2:328; OTP, 1:804.

331. De Horrack, “Livre des Respirations,” 134.

332. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 21.

333. Klaus Koch, “Wort und Einheit des Schöpfergottes in Memphis und Jerusalem: Zur Einzigartigkeit Israels,”

Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche 62 (1965): 269.

334. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 276.

335. PT 302 §462a–b; see Grieshammer, Jenseitsgericht in

den Sargtexten, 59.

336. [The scribe has written nw “of” for the expected m

“in.” As Demotic and Coptic transcriptions show, there often seems to be no distinction made in the

pronunciation of these two terms—eds.]

337. Budge, Book of the Dead: Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, A.nhai, Kerāsher and Netchemet, 34.

338. Walter Wreszinski, “Das Buch vom Durchwandeln der Ewigkeit nach einer Stele im Vatikan,” ZÄS 45 (1908–9): 114.

339. Gaballa A. Gaballa and Kenneth A. Kitchen, “The Festival of Sokar,” Or 38 (1969): 43.

340. See below, appendix 3, pp. 487–501.

341. Hermann Grapow, Das 17. Kapitel des ägyptischen Totenbuches und seine religionsgeschichtliche

Bedeutung (Berlin: Paul, 1912), 9.

342. PT 306 §476–79, in Raymond O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969), 94.

343. CT 136, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:160–64; cf. CT 134–35, 137, 142, 146, etc., in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:158–60, 165–72, 174–75, 180–205, etc.

344. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:33.

345. Barguet, Livre des Morts, 19.

346. Hans O. Lange and Otto Neugebauer, Papyrus Carlsberg No. I: Ein hieratisch-demotischer

kosmologischer Text (Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1940), 49.

347. Hermann Junker, Die Götterlehre von Memphis (Schabaka-Inschrift) (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1940), 19.

348. For more on Ptah, see above, commentary to lines 20–

21, pp. 219–20.

349. Short Amduat, twelfth hour, lines 270–74, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:35.

350. CT 75, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:332.

351. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 164.

352. Siegfried Morenz, review of Die Stellung des Königs im Alten Reich, by Hans Goedicke, OLZ 56 (1961): 247.

353. Morenz, review of Die Stellung des Königs, 246–47.

354. Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt, “Poissons, tabous et transformations du mort: Nouvelles conditions sur les pélerinages aux villes saintes,” Kêmi 13 (1954): 33–42; TB Baba Qamma 16b (I, iv), in Lazarus Goldschmidt, Der babylonische Talmud (The Hague: Nijoff, 1933–

35), 6:54.

355. Piankoff, “Deux papyrus ‘mythologiques’ de Her-Ouben au Musée du Caire,” 143.

356. P. Bremner-Rhind 26/21–24, 27/1–3, in Faulkner, Papyrus Bremner-Rhind, 59–61.

357. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 143 §189.

358. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 12.

359. Raymond O. Faulkner, “The Bremner-Rhind Papyrus—

I,” JEA 22 (1936): 132.

360. Baer, “Breathing Permit of Hôr, 126.

Commentary, Part 7

Culmination and Conclusion

Instructions for Wrapping

The Joseph Smith Papyri and Papyrus

Louvre N. 3284 both contain a short section

of final instructions that is only rarely found

in Books of Breathings—Philippe-Jacques

de Horrack found it in “mutilated and

altered” condition in only three of the many

Breathings texts in the Louvre. It appears as

an appendix to the Papyrus Louvre N. 3284

but has the place of honor in the Joseph

Smith text, where it figures as a preface,

written in larger, bolder, and clearer

characters than the other columns. The texts

of de Horrack and Joseph Smith are almost

identical and both almost perfectly

preserved, but they are so puzzling in content that we have thought it best to supply the

reader with the expert translations of

Professors Richard Parker, Klaus Baer, and

de Horrack along with our own speculations.

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 98–

108

98 (6/1). Osiris is to be as one towed into

( lit. to within) the

99. great lake (pool) of Khonsu [ JSP

inserts the initiate’s name] after

100. he hath taken possession of his heart

[ JSP: [has clasped] his two arms upon his breast, being as wrapped]

de Horrack1

Parker2

Baer3

after his

After he

After his

arms have

has

two arms are

been pla ced

repossessed

[fast]ened to

on his heart

his heart, one

his breast,

and … has

buries in the

one wraps

been

coffin

wrapped

101. the

101. the

101. the

Book of

Book of

Breathing

Respirations,

Breathings,

Permit

which

which is

(which

102 (6/5).

is written on

two sides

102. [Isis]

102. with

[ JSP: written

made and

writing both

according to

has writing

inside and

what is in

on its inside

outside of it,

the books

and outside)

inside and

out]

103. with

103. in

103. on

royal linen, it

royal linen

suten-cloth.

being placed

and placed

Placed under

at his left

under his left

his left arm

arm

arm

104. near

104. near

his heart, this

104. near

to his heart.

having been

his heart;

done

105. [ De

Horrack

writes in his

commentary:

105. the

“I have not

rest of his

been able to

105. at his

mummy

decipher line

wrapping

bandages

8 of the

and outside

should be

hieratic text”;

it.

wrapped

JSP: Having

over it.

been done

for his

wrapping on

the outside.]

106. As for the one for whom this writing

is made ( or If he makes this book for him), he shall go on breath-107 (6/10). ing along with ( vs. JSP: like) the bas of the gods for

108. time and for eternity.

Commentary

Lines 98–100: “Osiris is to be as one towed (infinitive?) into ( lit. to within) the (this) great lake (pool) of Khonsu after he hath

taken possession of ( lit. seized upon) his heart”

Getting possession of the heart is the

satisfactory goal and conclusion of all the

preceding rites. 4 Hence the final procession to the necropolis begins only after that has

been accomplished.

The Lake of Khonsu, Osiris as

Sokar

The pool of Khonsu is definitely the end of

the road, and these are the last of the last

rites. The scene is overpoweringly dark and

impressive, but there is plenty of ritual

information behind it. An important clue here

is the word towed ( sṯȝw) . The Book of Two Ways also ends with the towing of the solar

bark, 5 first on the land way and then on the oft-mentioned “lake,” 6 while chapter 125 of the Book of the Dead finds the subject in the

following of Osiris being towed along with

the kings of Upper and Lower Egypt . 7 The

“towing of Osiris” as the final act of the

funeral is “the overcoming of the world, and

death” (fig. 132; see p. 419, fig. 134). 8

Figure 132. The subject and his wife draw the Sokar-bark on its sled toward the life-giving sun; he also sows and cultivates, showing the old seasonal

vegetation character of the rites, which deal with the

renewal of life. P. Busca (BD 18), location unknown.

After Naville, Das ägyptische Todtenbuch, 1: pl.

XXXI.

In his capacity of being towed ( sṯȝw) , this Osiris is Sokar; as early as the Pyramid

Texts the Osiris mysteries include a

“Sokaris-litany” of Horus on the Sokar-

bark. 9 Chapter 100 of the Book of the Dead, entitled “Entering the Great Ship of Re,”

begins, “I open the caverns of the Nile, I free

the Way of Aton; I tow Sokar on his sled. ”10

The god who is towed to the pool of Khonsu

is Osiris as the “sleeping Sokar” being taken

to his resting place.11 Just as the king, acting as Khonsu, 12 represents the great turning point, “the beginning and the end,” 13 so the king must become Sokar to inaugurate both

the year and the regeneration of the cycle of

vegetation. 14 The towing of the bark took place at all year-rites as well as at the sed-

festival, all of which, as rites of passage, ideally fall at the solstice, the turn of the

year. 15 In these rites the ship of Re is equated to the sled of Sokar; and indeed, the Sun

when he is towed on a ceremonial sled is

specifically Sokar in the temple reliefs of

Karnak,16 where it is the king himself who pulls the Ptah-Sokar-Osiris sled in the rite

designated as “the towing of Sokar.” 17 In the Middle Kingdom Ptah-Sokar-Osiris was

known “both as a single god and as a

plurality,” but after the New Kingdom Sokar

became simply “a name or aspect of

Osiris.” 18

At Thebes the djed-column of Osiris was

raised “for Sokar,” 19 and the god takes on various forms as he passes through different

regions, the process being completed when

he enters the holy ship by the secret ways of

the West. 20 As early as the First Dynasty there was “a periodic ‘feast of the Maaty

Barque’ involving Sokar and the king, ”21

which feast was, in the Old Kingdom,

immediately preceded by the wag-festival22

as part of the New Year’s rites; the day

following this Sokar-festival came the Nḥb-

kȝ.w on the first day of the year, marking “the accession of Horus as legitimate and

triumphant successor of his father,” with

reference to the sed-festival as well. 23 In Ptolemaic times, at least, the towing of the

Sokar-bark took place at the time of the

winter solstice, the true turn of the year, the

moment at which the sun is lowest and all is

darkest.24 Wag- and Sokar-festivals coincide because they represent the completion of a

life cycle, “at the end of thy (the king’s)

years.” 25 Sokar himself is “Lord of time who gives years,” “the eldest son of the Primeval

One,” he “who holds the earth in its

place.” 26 At Medinet Habu “Sokar’s triumphal peregrination with the dawn is

tacitly equated with Rēʿ’s emergence in the East upon crossing the Lake (and Isle) of

Flames.” 27 The Sokar-ship is the Sokar, who is Shesmu, a “passive,” “gloomy,”

underworld type, a chthonian “god of death

[rather] than of the dead” —representing the

dormant life of things sleeping in the earth;28

this is the moment when everything seems

deadest, and hope and vitality are at their

lowest ebb. Towing is emphasized because

the ship can no longer proceed on its way

otherwise—it has run out of water and so

must be dragged as a sled rather than a ship

over the hot sand in a snake-filled desert. 29

“Towed is this great god on the prepared

ways of the duat, in the upper half of the secret cave of Sokar on the sand.” 30 The case is desperate; the ship cannot even be

towed without the magic assistance of Isis, 31

and only those who know the proper pictures

can avoid becoming stranded on the

sandbank of Nehaher ( nḥȝ-ḥr) . 32 Nothing can be more depressing than the nocturnal

navigation for the burial of “the embalmed

Sokar-Osiris” 33 at the winter solstice.34 This is the vessel stranded and motionless, 35

trapped in the sands of the most secret,

invisible, dark, and holy Sokar-land.36 But the darkest hour brings hope; the towing of

the god through the bowels of death is

actually the means of affecting rejuvenation

—it is a case of “death [as] the begetter of

gods and men.” 37 Moreover, the passage of Sokar in the depths is a true descensus,

bringing life to others: as he is “towed on the

sand of a dried-up wadi,” the god sees the

shores lined with spirits of the dead,

languishing in captivity. 38 He has come to teach them and deliver them. 39 At the first hour along the route of the Amduat, “the

teachings of the sun-god to the inhabitants of

the underworld” were preserved on a monumental stela representing the sun-god as

Re, Atum, Khepri, and Osiris. 40 At his various subsequent stopping places, “they in

Wernes come when he makes a stop. … He

preaches, teaching them in a loud voice from

his boat, … and they gather around his bark.

… Then they lament … as he proceeds on

his way.” 41 “It is a lamentation that surrounds him after he has imparted his

teachings.” 42 The ship represents the ever-forward motion of creation and of the world

itself;43 it brings both light and enlightenment into the darkness. 44 “Lift up your face(s), inhabitants of [the] D[u]at! Osiris Nes-Min

… has come to you. You can see him. … You

recognise Osiris Nes-Min … as the lord of

all of you. … [He] gives commands to [the]

people. He judges the living [on the shore of

the] D[u]at.” 45 The Sun’s descensus is the parousia of the Lord to those who sit in

darkness.

To the turning point of the year, Carl

Hentze, in his provocative Mythes et

symboles lunaires, gave the name of “point mort,” the instant when everything stops

dead still.46 For at the winter solstice a miraculous thing takes place; the shadow of

the sunstone, which up until that moment had

been for half a year lengthening itself daily

toward the north, is suddenly (by the use of simple instruments) found to be moving in

the opposite direction! There must have been

a moment at which it stopped and reversed

its course.

So while Sokar represents the moment at

which all things come to an absolute halt, the

theme of his cult is renewal. At Karnak

under Thutmosis III “the whole complex

would seem to be dedicated to the renewal

of the divine king in terms of the festival of

Sokar (4th of Akhet), the feast of Neḥeb-kau

(1st Peret, day 1 [i.e., the New Year]) and the Sed-feast or jubilee. … The emphasis is on the king and his renewal. ”47 In such a situation the breathing motif is in order: the

breath of life is the wind that moves the boat

and the oxygen that enables the crew to

resume rowing: “O ye who sail upon the

waters of Nun, … may there be wind in your

souls, that they may not be cramped

(suffocated), that your arms may row.” 48 The unpleasant experience on the sand only

heightens the joy and sense of elation that

comes when the ship is freed and again

moves forward over the waters; what

rejoicing when they are off the sandbar!

“Apep has been overthrown, and the majesty

of this God has been vindicated! The hour of

Khonsu has come!” Upon reaching the Field

of Reeds, all the gods tumble happily out of

the boat to celebrate; “the heaven is in

beauty, all the earth is happy ( ḥtp) . ” 49 As the

ship moves on, we remember that after all it

is the solar-bark, a sky-ship, “moving in

light” (fig. 133).50 “Through [the night journey] the Sun is towed or hauled by the

stars, ‘the Indefatigables.’” 51 The dead person being towed as Sokar on his sled is

also Re being towed in the phoenix-vessel of

light and resurrection, 52 and the waters of passage are the waters of Nun, the heavenly

ocean, the Qbḥw, the life-giving waters of the sky.

Figure 133. The last two stations of the solar-ship

before it leaves the Underworld show it bearing the Sokar-hawk emerging from his wrappings above an

opening lotus (the sign of the resurrection), followed by the sun at its rising in the east, lifted by the winged Khepri-beetle. Ceiling of temple of Isis, Philae, ca.

A.D. 210.

The magnificent reliefs from Medinet

Habu depict the stunning dramatization of the

Sokar-journey in the temple rites. In a

triumphant procession through the temple, 53

with the choir chanting as the parade moved

from room to room and with the temple head

himself acting as recitant and director of

ceremonies, 54 Sokar passes through symbolic gates of heaven to be greeted with

the hnw-rite hailing the presence of a

divinity on earth (see p. 361, fig. 115). 55 The cult object was the prehistoric figure of a

hawk emerging from mummy wrappings and

riding in a shrine on a golden ship mounted

on a sled equipped with carrying rods so that

the whole could be carried or pulled over land or water (fig. 134). 56 The sled attachment and the carrying rods were no

mere afterthought: they are never missing

from the vessel. To have both sled runners

and a ship’s hull is quite in agreement with

the situation of the seventh hour in which the

ship lacks water and has to be towed over

the sand or even carried. It would seem that

amphibious travel— Schiffahrt auf dem

Lande—was an authentic heritage of the

early migrations which brought the dynastic

race into Egypt;57 the old amphibious craft have survived to modern times in northern

Sudan, 58 and actual ceremonial ship-cars,

“floats” of the ancient Egyptians, have been

discovered. 59 At Thebes, “any ‘navigation’

westward … would be a land procession,

and a ‘navigation’ only metaphorically; it is

even possible to suggest that it may have

been enacted in the temple precinct. ”60 But it

was nonetheless a ship procession. 61 The Egyptian temple was provided with

processional passage both by land and

water.62 As every pyramid complex had its landing wharf, so every temple has its “ship

room ( Barkenraum)” and a passage

provided around the ship shrine. 63 Ramses II provided ships, wagons, and “many horses”

for the procession of “his father Khonsu.” 64

Figure 134. The basic form of the Sokar-ship has remained recognizable for more than three thousand years. (A) The oldest example is an ivory jar label that shows the ox head and reverse oryx head.

Restored drawing from ivory plaque, ca. 3100 B.C.

Courtesy of Cairo Museum. (B) Ramses II runs

toward Thoth and his father, Seti, towing an elegant Sokar-ship, while two forms of the Sokar-hawk

emerge from his wrappings. Restored drawing from

temple of Seti I, Abydos, ca. 1260 B.C. (C) Pharaoh himself tows the Sokar-ship, which has both carrying-rods and runners to travel over land and water. The passenger is Sokar, emerging from his wrappings atop a burial mound. The reverse oryx head at the prow

identifies the ship, according to Derchain, with the skin or garment of rebirth which enveloped the dead king. The inscription designates the scene as a rite of rejuvenation in which Sokar, brought forth in glory and circumambulating the shrine of Elephantine (as once at Heliopolis), assures the repeated appearance of the sun on the horizon and the ever-renewed youth of Re.

Restored drawing from photograph of temple of

Horus, Edfu, ca. 200 B.C. (D) Hawk-headed Osiris-

Sokar, wrapped as a mummy, rests on a lion couch

with the Sokar-ship awaiting resurrection. Restored from photograph and drawing of Osiris chapel on roof of temple of Isis, Philae, ca. A.D. 200.

At Memphis and Medinet Habu, “some kind of sacred lake may have existed (or a

canal [to] be sailed on), for corresponding

‘navigation’ rites” —that is, corresponding

to the nocturnal navigation associated with

the burial of the embalmed Sokar-Osiris.65 It would seem that every Egyptian temple had

such a lake, filled naturally by seepage from

the Nile, the true water of life and death, and

that such lakes were used to float the model

ships of the temple. 66

Khonsu

Line 99: “great lake (pool) of Khonsu”

Khonsu (as the name is written here) is

usually represented as a youthful moon-god,

his name being interpreted as “he who

passes through” (see p. 117, fig. 28).67 The name is quite suitable to the present

situation; at the moment that the ship

becomes freed and moves away from the

terrible sandbar that threatens to bring all life to a permanent close, the joyful cry is

raised: “Khonsu’s hour has come!” while all

the gods begin a wild celebration. 68 It was Khonsu who turned death to life—the patron

of Egyptian medical doctors, whose

Asculapian baton restored the dead to life at

a touch. 69 Siegfried Morenz compares his mysterious name with that of Amon, “the

hidden one, the invisible god,” and asks

whether these two names may not be what he

calls “taboo-names,” designed not to reveal

but, rather, to conceal the real name and

identity in fear of the supernatural ( aus

numinoser Scheu), designating the god by an epithet only, indicating only some of his

limited and special aspects or activities.70 A Theban text says of Khonsu that his name is

not known and that his nature and form are

not known but that he goes by the name of

Amon—which is appropriate enough since

Amon also means unknown.71 To dismiss Khonsu, therefore, as the youthful moon-god

is a neat and easy reply to the layman’s

curiosity, but it leaves one with the

completely false impression that the

Egyptians themselves had nothing else in

mind. Erik Hornung warns against the old

established practice of glibly labeling an

Egyptian deity as “moon-god” or “earth-

god,” as if that explained everything,

ignoring the fact that universal or cosmic

gods often take special forms for special

occasions, when their epithets fall far short

of conveying their total nature. 72 Equally precarious is the attempt to explain the

nature and origin of any Egyptian god as the

primitive patron of this or that local shrine

since one and the same god may be found

operating in the earliest times at both local

and universal levels.73

Like Sokar, Khonsu is, above all, a symbol

of divine authority on earth; in a study of his name, Georges Posener designates Khonsu

as the model king,’ ‘the king who makes

kings,’ … ‘the child of the king,’” etc.—the

quintessence of royalty. 74 In ritual it is he who hands over to the king at the New Year

the authority of rites and ordinances dealing

with creation and initiation, along with the

scepters of life, endurance, and divine

power ( wȝs) , 75 emphasizing his powers exercised at the creation, where Khonsu is

“the Maker of Plans ( pȝ ỉr(ỉ) sḫrw).” 76

Aylward Blackman noted that the commonest

spelling of the name, Ḫnsw, identifies him with the king’s placenta or earthly double,77

regarded in primitive times as the “twin” or

“brother of the king.” 78 On the other hand, Blackman found the usual interpretation of

ḫns as “Traveller” “not very convincing.” 79

In yet another study, however, Posener

emphasizes the element of heavenly motion

in the Khonsu image: as the god “travels throughout the earth ( ḫns sȝṯ.w),” so the

dead, following his lead, “removes himself

( ḫns) like Khonsu and scintillates ( ḫȝbȝs) like the stars ( ḫȝbȝs).” 80 Posener, however, does not reject the other interpretation of the

name which derives it from ḫ-n-nsw.t, “child ( ḫ) of the king ( nsw.t)” —that is, the son of Pharaoh.81

It is entirely fitting and proper that the

Breathings text should conduct one to the

pool of Khonsu. Papyrus Rhind describes

“the celebration of the great lake of Khonsu”

as the final step before one goes to his rest in

the necropolis. 82 As the last lap of the journey, the pool of Khonsu offers, so to

speak, his last chance to be saved—and that

chance is not wasted, for Khonsu brings life-

restoring breath; he is nothing less than “the

windpipe of Amun,” 83 and his lake is the gateway to heaven. As a person, Khonsu is

usually portrayed as a youth in mummy wrapping and youth curl, standing

immediately behind Amon on the throne,

bearing the three royal scepters and wearing

the moon-crown as the third member of the

royal family; 84 at the same time, Amon is handing the identical royal scepters to the

earthly pharaoh, the kneeling Ramses II. In

Medinet Habu the king is “conducted by Mut

and Khonsu into the temple” where he

“dance[s] with the ship’s gear before Amon-

Re,” showing that Khonsu in the palace does

not lose his interest in navigation. 85 The ship’s gear and royal dancing go back to the

earliest coronation rites. 86 Khonsu is a grim and solemn figure: “The demon Khensu

catches gods and men for the deceased king,

that he may eat them. … Khensu is a demon,

who devours people alive” 87—and, indeed, the person towed to the lake of Khonsu is on

his last journey. But he is not dead forever!

Paul Barguet designates Khonsu as “the moon-god, who dies and is reborn

periodically; he is a nocturnal sun, an

inanimate form, not manifest, a potential

force” 88—in which sense he is exactly like Sokar, “the dormant power of nature.” His

crown, combining new moon and full moon,

shows that he is the lunar “point mort,” as

Sokar is the solar solstice; Khonsu, says

Gertrud Thausing, is “Beginning and

Ending!” 89 Significantly, there are no myths or tales recorded of Khonsu, who is found at

home only in Thebes and there always and

only as the third member of the family triad

he makes with Amon and Nut. 90 He is the indispensable heir who makes succession

possible.91 Yet he dominates the only surviving Egyptian temple pylon, which

happens to be devoted entirely to solar

symbolism. 92 Finally, the pool of Khonsu, if it is to be a water of rebirth, is also a water

of purification, and in the temple of Ramses II it is Khonsu who purifies his father with

natron.93 Taking Khonsu’s many functions and offices altogether, he may perhaps be

best characterized as the great go-between,

the intermediary, the officiant in the

mysteries, sharing that essential character

with Thoth as the moon-god.

Lines 99–100: “after he hath taken

possession of his heart”

On the importance of the deceased’s

possessing his heart, which is identified with

the ka itself “in the role of the protective genie of the deceased,” see Alexandre

Piankoff; 94 for the psychology and physiology of the heart, see Adriaan de

Buck;95 and see Samuel Birch and Wilhelm Spiegelberg on the special heart formulas.96

Ḫfʿ ḥr is the expression here rendered “take possession of”; ḫfʿ means “to grasp,” “to

seize by force” (as to take booty), or to take over complete control, usually with m. With ḥr as used here it means to take with both hands, lay hold of, 97 suggesting the peculiar and rather grim declaration that one’s heart

is not going to get away from him this time! 98

Compare the well-known “spell for not

permitting a man’s heart to be taken from

him”:99 “Ani’s heart is his; he has gained mastery over it. … He is lord thereof, it is in

his body, and it shall never fall away

therefrom.” 100

The Papyrus Louvre N. 3279 Book of

Breathings sums up all objectives in the

integrity of the heart: “O my heart, I am thy

Lord; do not go far from me ever—by

(written) command of Tatenen the great!

Hearken to me, my heart, my own, being in

my body; do not lean against me (in the

scales).” 101 Heart, mind, breathing, and life are fused in a single word and symbol, the

well-known nfr, which represents “heart and windpipe” together and signifies good’ and

related words,” 102 such as youthful, fresh, beautiful, perfect, renewed. Bruno Stricker

has called attention to the relation of the

heart and the pneuma in a single symbol .103

The Egyptians judged the condition of the

heart of a sacrificial victim by smelling it.104

Parker and Baer respectively render this

line “after his two arms are [fast]ened to his

breast” 105 and “after his arms have been pla ced on his heart,” 106 both referring to the Joseph Smith version only. Here we follow

the de Horrack text: m-ḫt ḫfʿ=f ḥr ḥȝt=f,

“after he has repossessed his heart ( lit. after he has laid hold upon his heart).”

Symbolic Wrappings and Veils

The short and cryptic section of

instructions included in the Joseph Smith and

de Horrack Breathings texts places great

emphasis on writing and wrapping, which seem to have a definite ritual significance. It

would seem that from the earliest times, the

act of wrapping a mummy imparted power

and divinity to the body, the standard

Egyptian symbol for divinity being “a staff

with cloth strips wrapped around it,”

denoting the word nṯr, for which an archaic synonym was wt, meaning to wrap a

mummy;107 according to Hornung, the dead becomes nṯrw, sanctified, in the sense of a

“wrapped-up cloth fetish.” 108 In the Late Period as well, one was thought to impart

divine power ( nṯry) to the mummy by

“binding” or wrapping it. 109 The Book of Breathings must be written on cloth so that it

can be wrapped, the writing and wrapping

having the same protective purpose. “All

cloth and all material on its [the mummy’s]

head must be made from these strips

(wrappings). Their condition and the

representations (drawn) on them must be examined by the One Who Is Over the

Mysteries (Anubis) because it is beneficial

to have the written characters properly

authenticated.” 110 Such protective charms, written on strips of cloth and guaranteed to

be effective “as proven useful millions of

times,” were used by the living as well as

the dead in Egypt. 111

In the Setne story the last thing the hero

Neneferkaptah does before falling into the

waters of death, amidst universal

lamentation, is described thus: “He caused to

be brought unto him a strip of royal linen and

made it as a bandage. He bound the book; he

put it on his body and made it firm. And

coming forth from under the awning of the

pleasure-boat of Pharaoh, he fell into the

river, he accomplished the will of Ra. All

they who were on board uttered a cry, all

saying, ‘Great woe! Grievous woe!’” etc. 112

When the funeral ship reached Memphis,

“They took him up, they saw the book on his

body. And Pharaoh said, ‘Let this book

which is on his body be hidden away’” and

ordered Neneferkaptah to be duly processed

in the Good House with “wrapping of (?)

thirty-five [days].” 113

The seemingly incongruous association of

the towing of the dead on the lake of Khonsu

with a rite of mummy wrapping is confirmed

elsewhere at several points. In this situation

the candidate is Osiris-Sokar or Horus-

Sokar on the Sokar-bark114 and is represented by the archaic figure of a

crouching hawk whose head alone emerges

from a cloth covering or shroud. This

covering is of supreme significance, for the

navigation of Osiris on the night of the

winter solstice was followed on the 23rd of

December by the wrapping of the new image

of Sokar, and on the following day “the old

Sokar and other images were ceremonially rewrapped for ultimate burial on the 30th,”

the last day of the year. 115 Moreover, one and the same symbol, a reversed oryx head,

designated both the wraparound garment of

the defunct king (identical with that of the

Sokar-hawk) and the ship of Sokar, on which

it always appears as a figurehead. 116 Ritual ship and royal garment meet us in the great

year-rites of the Panathenaian, when the sail

of the sacred ship, drawn overland to the

temple, was made of the same stuff as the

new mantle in which the image of Athena

was enfolded, 117 Athena being the old Egyptian Neith. Egyptian and Greek motifs

mingle in the story of how Isis, after making

the infant Horus invulnerable by bathing him

in fire (the Achilles motif), cut down the

cedar pillar and wrapped it in linen, singing

a dirge for the child, 118 the cedar log being the ship which bore the defunct Horus from

Egypt to Byblos.

The same all-enveloping, shroudlike

covering was worn by the Sokar-hawk, by

Osiris standing to receive the initiate in the

capacity of king of the dead, and by the king

at the sed-festival, the great renewal of

kingship and cosmos. Sed means both

“cloth” 119 and “tail,” referring to the skin garment of royal rebirth and rejuvenation. 120

In their vital protective function, the burial

garments preserve and thereby impart the

spark of life itself; in particular it is Khonsu,

always represented as a well-wrapped

mummy, who, in his capacity of nfr, clasps the breast of Amun “in the place of his heart”

and, by so doing, endows him with all that is

nfr: life, breath, heart, and the power of kingship. 121 This Khonsu did, in company with Maat, by a ritual embrace, represented

sometimes by the pectoral, “which is upon

the throat” of the god and represents the life-

giving embrace and divine proximity. 122 The statue of Khonsu was cunningly contrived

with movable arms to perform such an office

for the living. 123 Whether at the coronation or the funeral, the ritual garment enfolding

the candidate “had to ‘clasp,’ ‘embrace’ the

beneficiary in a close hug,” which was

actually a ritual embrace. 124 By such an embrace the king was thought to become

“Sokar on the arms of Horus” —Horus, the

royal successor and upholder of his father,

being equated with the sacred Sokar-bark

( ḥnw) which bore the latter up to heaven. 125

So in Joseph Smith Papyrus XI 3/12, we

read, “Horus the Behdetite has enfolded thy

body to make ( or making) divine thy ba.”

The solar imagery is important here; the

sun at his rising receives a parting embrace

in the arms of Osiris, 126 and the place of sunrise at Hermopolis was “the Island of

Embracing. ”127 One of the commonest

representations of the embracing arms depicts them as lifting the sun up over the

horizon, reminding us that the rising sun, the

emergence of the king from the house of the

morning, and the passage of the dead to the

other world all take place between the arms

of deity.128 This same gesture of the upraised arms, the ka symbol, also represents the

sacred embrace.129

In the pyramid of Unas, the passing of the

mummy through a narrow passage from one

chamber to another was described as a ship

voyage but called “the embrace of Nut, ”130

while, as we have seen, the coffin itself was

designed to represent the embracing arms of

the same goddess. It is interesting that the

most striking evidence for the concept of the

coffin as “embracing” its occupant has been

found in a heretofore ignored Book of

Breathings, Papyrus Louvre N. 3148,131 in which Nut addresses the one embraced as

“her eldest son,” thus making him an Osiris.132 The towing of the ship between two banks in the underworld was also

thought of as an “embrace.” 133 In a good sense, it was the uniting of the two banks by

ritual embrace, “causing the god to snsn with his brother.” 134

In the Egyptian rites, we are often

confronted with the concept of enfolding,

embracing, enclosing, fondling, incubation,

and the like; in mythology, the idea is

expressed by the nest, womb, cave,

mountain, protecting arms, serpentine coils,

etc., while the imagery is given concrete

form in the coffin chamber, sarcophagus,

pyramid, shrine, various passages, rooms,

vessels, etc. The mummy wrapping

represents both a life-giving embrace and a

protective cocoon (fig. 135). 135 Seti I is represented in his temple, wrapping and

unwrapping Amon-Re, Isis, Horus, etc., in a

white robe or sheath which can also take the form of mummy bands (see color plate 9). 136

Ritual Embraces

The normal sequence of ordinances as

depicted in temple reliefs is, according to

Barguet, washing, laying on of hands,

leading by the hand, entering the gate,

embracing, and crowning. 137 In Egyptian rites, gates or doorways are symbolic of

passage and arrival, of the completion of one

phase of the operation and the beginning of

another; not only is the gate the normal place

for the embrace of greeting and farewell, but,

as the symbols and inscriptions engraved on

the door frames of tombs and temples make

clear, the portal itself typifies the performing

of such an embrace. 138 A spontaneous and natural gesture, embracing is not only a sign

of affection but also one of acceptance,

recognition, and reception at every level,

from the formal and hypocritical embrace of

the diplomat to the “mystic union” of the

initiate. The ritual embrace is the

“culminating rite of the initiation”; 139 it is

“an initiatory gesture weighted with meaning

… , the goal of all consecration.” 140 We have to deal with a variety of embraces, 141 all closely interrelated. Let us list the principal

ones.

Figure 135. On this Ptolemaic cartonnage breastplate,

wrapping and embracing divinities mingle in profusion.

At the lowest level the candidate appears as Osiris in his sheath; on the next level the four canopic figures all hold mummy wrappings, as does the priest in the next level. Instead of canopic jars beneath the bed, we see four bundles of clothing. The bird, the Two Ladies, the Maat-Nut figure, and the scarab above all have outspread arms. BM 6968 © Copyright The

British Museum.

1. Natal: The most sincere and natural of

embraces is that by which the newborn babe

is received into the bosom of the family, a

situation ritualized as part of the Opening of

the Mouth ceremony, in which the candidate

was first washed like a newborn child, then

anointed, then fed milk and honey to start it

nursing, “in the sense of giving it new life,”

and then clasped in a fond welcoming

embrace.142 The “arm opening” is, in fact, the ritual sequel to the “mouth opening. ”143

2. Conjugal: In the same spirit of warm

family intimacy was “the festival of the

beautiful embrace,” when Horus, in a bedizening succession of roles as, variously,

father, brother, and son of the lady Hathor,

also joins her as husband, the issue of their

union being Harsotmus, who is none other

than Horus himself!144 Related to this as part of the festival was the ritual embracing of

Shu and Tefnut, the first parents of the race,

in the abaton at Philae.145 There are many variations on the theme: “The Lady of

Denderah fares upstream to celebrate the

lovely embrace with this Horus. ”146 The first part of Papyrus Bremner-Rhind is

completely occupied with it: there it is the

Two Ladies, Isis and Nephthys—mother and

nurse respectively—who yearn for the

companionship of the youthful god and ask to

make him alive again by their embraces. 147

One thinks of the dead being received into

the embrace of Nut, the coffin and the sky,

there to receive new life. 148 “Thy Mother

Nut joins herself to thee, … she embraces thee. … Awake, awake in peace. … Thy

beloved one, the Lady of the Fruit-trees,

brings to thee what thou desirest.” 149

3. Maternal: It is characteristically

Egyptian that the conjugal embrace should

overlap with the maternal. The Book of

Breathings was read aloud by a priest, just

as the lid of the coffin was being closed150—

that is, just as the dead was being received

into the embrace of Nut, even into her womb,

in order to be born again, 151 an idea clearly expressed in the third line of Papyrus Louvre

N. 3284.152 As Isis and Nephthys embrace the dead to restore life, 153 so “thy Mother Nut joins herself to thee … she embraces

thee … awake in peace! ”154 So also the two ladies Nekhbet and Edjo embrace the king on

his throne, putting their arms around him to

preserve him “in life, stability, and

serenity.” 155 The royal pyramid, the passages and chambers in it, and the sarcophagus and

coffin were each in turn thought of as

representing the embrace of the goddess,

giving rest, protection, and finally life itself

to the mummy.156 The basic idea is that of mother and nurse fondling and protecting the

Horus-child. 157 So also, “Maāt … hath placed her arms around thee … and she hath

made thee to come into being.” 158

4. Familial: In some of the Coffin Texts,

the whole family gets into the scene as in

spell 146: “Behold, this NN (the initiate) has

gone down to heaven, he has gone down to

the earth, he has gone down to the water,”

i.e., he has passed through all the stations;

accordingly, “he embraces his family, he

embraces ( or moves in with) his father and mother, he embraces his brothers and sisters,

he embraces his children, he embraces his

household, he embraces his friends, he

embraces those who have entered a covenant with him ( smȝw=f) and those attached to him who have done work for him on earth” ;159 in the capacity of “Geb who created (begot) the

Great Ones,” he recognizes and embraces the

wife of his bosom, “for this N has reunited

his progeny and his wives. ”160 “O Atum-Re!

O Geb! Behold N in heaven, on earth, on the

waters (he is on his way); N has embraced

his family in heaven, on earth, in the waters;

N is satisfied completely.” 161 It will be recalled that the ultimate objective of the

ordinance as set forth in the second line of

our Book of Breathings was that the initiate

might join or “fuse with” his father at the

horizon. To be received into the arms of Re

on the horizon was indeed the culmination of

Egyptian initiation. 162

5. Social: Closely related to the familial is the social embrace, when the initiate enters

the company of the elect as a high-class

social gathering: “The gates of the hidden kingdom are opened to thee; the gatekeepers

hold out their arms to thee, rejoicing in thine

approach (and saying): Thou enterest in

favor, thou goest forth as one beloved.” 163

6. Paternal: But by far the most significant embrace is that of the father as he appears under various names in the Pyramid Texts.

The rites of Unas reach their culmination

when, at the center niche of the serdab on the

far side of the “celestial room,” “the creator

himself” embraces the candidate to represent

“the fusion of the heaven-bound deceased

with the sun-god Re.” 164 At the gates of the horizon Re will “[wind] his arms, around”

the candidate and take him to his heart. 165 As the king passes to heaven, “Thy heralds

come to ask thy father to receive thee back

into his embrace,” 166 the embrace always marking a moment of passage in the pyramid

rites. 167 More often the embracer is Atum,

the Ancient One with whom the genealogy of the race begins. 168 Even as one came into his earthly existence in the embrace of his

mother, Nut, the High Lady of Heliopolis, so

he passes “into a heavenly existence”

through the embrace of his father. 169 When

“the embrace of the coffin” suddenly

becomes “the embrace of Atum, the dead

now disappears to pass beyond to glory,”

leaving the arms of the mother for those of

the father. 170 “Come into being, go up on high, … it will be pleasant for you in the

embrace of your father, in the embrace of

Atum. O Atum, raise this king up to you;

enclose him within your embrace, for he is

your son of your body for ever.” 171 A relief found at the entrance to Egyptian temples

shows the god of the temple receiving the

king into his arms and thus welcoming him to

his endowment. 172 When “Atum opens his arms” to the candidate, the way of further

progress is opened up to him.173

Figure 136. (A) In this earliest known example of the royal embrace, Horus the god speaks to Horus the

king. They stand nose to nose, exchanging the breath of life. Restored drawing of Qa-hedjet Stela, ca. 2650

B.C. Courtesy of Louvre Museum.

In the paternal embrace the father-son

relationship is all-important. 174 In the exchange each receives power from the

other, the father because he is called the

wearied one, being dead: “I hold in my

embrace this my father who has become

weary,” says Horus. “May he become quite

strong again. ”175 There are other names for the father, as when Re, in his capacity of

Khnum the creator, “giving life to all,” holds

forth his arms, “creating men and gods” ;176

also, as Ptah the creator, he embraces the

sem-priest, sending him forth as newly

created man. 177 It is the clasping by Osiris of King Tutankhamun in the last scene of his

funeral rites “which transfers vital power

[his ka] from the god to the king.” 178 Or the king is “purified by Re and embraced by ( or

face to face with) Thoth, … not rejected by

Ptah.” 179 Where Amon of Thebes is all-inall, he, of course, is the embracer: “I am

thine image, who came forth from thee, thine

eldest son, who does what is well-pleasing

to thee. … My arms are about thee as Horus.

… I am he who opens the doors of heaven in

Karnak.” 180 The main idea is always the same. The presence of the Father, says the

Gospel of Truth, is represented by an

embrace.181

7. Royal: The climax and culmination of

the coronation rites was a ritual embrace of

father and son designated as sḫn, the word becoming a terminus technicus for the

coronation itself (fig. 136). 182 While Alexandre Moret prefers to retain the basic

meaning of “embracing,” 183 the plural form sḫn.w can be rendered as “enthronement,”

“installation,” and even simply as “throne.”

The sḫn-rite was taken over from the

coronation into the funerary rites, but in

either sphere it deals with the embracing of

an otherworldly father. 184 The word ḥp.t also designates the ritual embrace, and in the

Book of the Dead 17, we see it transferred

from the realm of the coronation and other

rites of renewal to the funerary sphere—the

king, the god, and the dead all receiving the

ritual ḥp.t-embrace at the moment of passing to their greatest glory, according to Moret. 185

Figure 136. (B) The four sides of an eleven-foot pillar, one of eight from the jubilee chapel of Senwosret, show the pharaoh being embraced by four different

gods in four different ways, just as the accompanying inscriptions are similar but never the same. Thus the divine family welcomes their son back home.

Senwsret I pillar, ca. 1940 B.C. Courtesy of Cairo Museum.

In the tomb of Haremheb, a commoner

who became king, we read: “This noble god Horus of Ḥnēs, his heart desired to establish

his son upon his eternal throne.” So he took

him into his embrace and then conducted him

“to Ipet-esut ( ỉp.t-sw.t, secret compartment), in order to induct him into the presence of

Amūn for the handing over to him of his

office of king and for the making of his

period (of life).” 186 This is called “the golden embrace of the king by the god” as

Ptah-Sokar the creator. 187

Adolf Rusch designated the embracing rite

found in the Pyramid Texts as an

Anerkennungslitanei, or rite of recognition, because, by being hugged in his arms, the

new king was recognized by this

predecessor, the old king (represented by a

priest as proxy), as his son, while at the

same time the new king recognized the other

as his father.188 The key to kingship is legitimacy, and this was the act by which it

was established and kingship was transmitted from one generation to another,

from an Osiris to a Horus. 189 Originally, according to Eberhard Otto, the sem-priest representing the son recited: “I have come

seeking ( sḫn) for thee. … I am thy beloved son! ”190 The word for “seeking,” m sḫn, also means “embrace” and is a code word

designating the search for Osiris, 191 but it also acquired the sense of “in thine embrace

( m sḫn=k)” — that is, by the embrace the son is recognized as legitimate. 192 The rites of the Shabako stone conclude with a line

declaring that the candidate to the throne has

reached his great objective: “his son …

appeared as king of Upper Egypt; he

appeared as king of Lower Egypt, in the

arms of his father Osiris, in the midst of the

gods.” 193 Likewise, in the Opening of the Mouth rite the ritual embrace of father and

son is the final scene. 194 “In the last picture

of the series” of Opening of the Mouth scenes in the tomb of Tutankhamun, “the

dead king and the god Osiris embrace each

other” (fig. 137).195

In the Pyramid Texts, the father is usually Atum: “Thou hast become (king), thou hast

been exalted; it is agreeable to thee, it is

cool in the embrace of thy father Atum,

within his embrace. Atum, let NN [the

candidate, at this early time always the king]

enter into thine embrace, enfold him in thine

arms, for he is the son of thy body even to

eternity. ”196 Rusch collected many examples of the royal embracing rite, which was also a

“recognition rite,” the “Horus ritual” by

which the father recognized the son.197 At the coronation of Ramses II, “we see the young

king being led into the presence of Atum by

Horus and another deity” and then

“Ramesses standing, being embraced by

Atum, who is enthroned.” 198 At the moment

of succession, “Horus appear[s] in the arms

of his father Osiris, ”199 which is the climax of “the Mystery Play of the Succession.” 200

Figure 137. Starting on the right, Tutankhamun’s

successor, Ay, is shown dressed in the panther skin robe of the sem- priest and opening the mouth of the deceased king with the ritual adze. The pharaoh is dressed as Osiris in a close-fitting white garment and holds the two flails of kingship. The middle scene shows the goddess Nut offering the nyny- gesture to the young king, who has his walking staff, ritual mace, and ankh. The final scene is the glorious culmination in which Tutankhamun is supported by his personified ka, who is crowned with the upraised arms. As Tutankhamun embraces Osiris, he receives the usual formula: “Given life for all time and eternity,” while Osiris reaches out to embrace his son through his

archaic white robe. Restored drawing from tomb of Tutankhamun, ca. 1320 B.C.

“The embracing ( sḫn) of the king by the

god is the definitive consecration” of the

new king, who at that moment alone becomes

fully consecrated, crowned, and sanctified,

according to Moret. 201 Before becoming a king, however, he must first become a priest,

and for that also he must be purified with

divine water, receive a garment, be

crowned, and be led into the sanctuary to

receive “the embrace of the god, the head of

the temple.” 202 In the final scene of the Opening of the Mouth, “the statue rests in the

chapel as … Horus in the arms of his father,”

where “the statue is Horus, the chapel is

Osiris,” and its door is the door of life.203

The cosmic implications of the scene are

recalled in the Coffin Texts: “He placed me

upon his neck; he would not let me depart

from him. My name lives: Son of the Primordial God. I live in the members of my

father Atum; I am the living one upon his

neck, … he sent me down to this earth even

to the Isle of Flame when my name became

Osiris, son of Geb.…My father Atum

embraced me ( sn wỉ) when he came from the

horizon of the East; his heart was pleased at

seeing me. ”204

One of the most puzzling episodes in the

Bible has always been the story of Jacob’s

wrestling with the Lord. When one considers

that the word conventionally translated as

“wrestled ( yēʾāvēq)” can just as well mean

“embrace” and that it was in this ritual

embrace that Jacob received a new name and

the bestowal of priestly and kingly power at

sunrise (Genesis 32:24–30), the parallel to

the Egyptian coronation embrace becomes at

once apparent.

One retained his identity after the ritual

embrace, yet that embrace was nothing less than a Wesensverschmelzung, a fusing of

identities, of mortal with immortal, of father

with son, and, as such, marked “the high

point of the whole mystery drama.” 205

“Osiris came to Mendes,” says the important

chapter 17 of the Book of the Dead, “and

found there the soul of Re. Thereupon they

embraced each other, and from that arose

Harendotes and Horus” —meaning, as

Hermann Grapow notes, that “out of the

embracing of Mendes and Re a new being

comes into existence,” though Grapow

confesses himself at a loss to explain the

meaning of the “saga.” 206 The ritual embrace, Henri Frankfort observes, was “no

mere sign of affection, but a true fusion, a

communion between two living spirits, unio

mystica. ” 207 When Horus is embraced by his father, Osiris, he becomes a new being, a

savior, that Re might look upon him as Wen-

nefer (the benefactor); “whereupon the two embrace each other.” 208 “Come to meet your father who is in me,” says a Coffin Text.

“Give me your arms. … I am he who created

you, as one created by your father Atum

when I was resting above the pillars of

heaven ( šw) . ”209 This is the familiar

“recognition” motif with its frequent fusion

of personalities: “I go to meet my image,”

says the Ginza, “and my image goes to meet

me. It fondles and embraces me, as if I had

returned from captivity.” 210 The concept both encouraged and was encouraged by the use

of images. When, for example, Horus the

Behdetite wanted to visit one of his shrines,

he would do so by embracing—fusing with

—his image in that place and thereby

identify himself with his visible presence in

the temple for the length of his sojourn. 211

Such an embrace, whether of a statue or a

living substitute, was a symbol of

indissoluble togetherness, according to

Otto,212 signifying a direct and enduring relationship between god and man, the actual

joining of the two.213

Figure 138. The ka-symbol personified as a protective paternal embrace holds the infant queen.

Restored drawing from temple of Hatshepsut, Deir

al-Bahri, ca. 1460 B.C.

Figure 139. The priest Sunur embraces his winged ba

on his chest while being embraced himself with a ka-gesture, ca. 1275 B.C. EA 65206 © Copyright The

British Museum.

Its most impressive symbol is the ka-sign

itself, whose upraised arms signify the act of

calling upon God, of praising him in the

rising sun, of receiving his protection, and of

fusion with his being. “O Atum-Khoprer, …

you set your arms about them [the first

parents of the human race] as the arms of a

ka-symbol, that your essence might be in

them [fig. 138]. O Atum, set your arms about

the king … and about this pyramid as the

arms of a ka-symbol, that the king’s essence may be in it, enduring for ever.” 214 “O Atum, place thy two hands behind N, that his ka

may live forever! O Atum, make the dhn-

gesture for N, protect him,” where the dhn is really the holding out of the hands

accompanying the formulas.215 So also,

“Maāt … hath placed her arms around thee,

thy Ka is in her, … and she hath made thee to come into being with the Ka of all the

gods.” 216 It is the embrace “which transfers vital power,” his ka, “from the god to the king.” 217 The heavy collar and counterweight worn by all the shrouded figures is the

symbol of a divine embrace, whereby the

soul of the god (for example, Re or Atum)

unites with that of the embraced one as a ka

(fig. 139). 218 An Amarna inscription reads,

“Let my eye see him, … my ear hear his

voice, while his ka is face to face with me ( m-bȝḥ=ỉ) continually.” And again,

addressing Ptah: “Place me before thee, with

thy ka facing me and mine eyes beholding thy beauty.” 219 By the same means, the dead becomes reunited with his own ka, thus

achieving eternal life: “O king, the arm of

your ka is in front of you! O king, the arm of your ka is behind you! O king, the foot of your ka is in front of you! O king, the foot of

your ka is behind you!” 220

The Last Barrier: The Temple Veils

Though the embrace of greeting or

farewell may mark any rite of passage, it is

only to be expected that the most important

embrace of all should take place at the last

gate of all, the ultimate door, a door different

from the others: “only the initiated free of

guilt may pass through it,” for it leads to

another world and a higher state of being. 221

In form it has neither panels nor hinges222—

that is, it is not really a door or gate. Nagel

designates it as “the last barrier,” where “he

who grasps the mysteries” at last receives

the crown. 223

At the coronation of Haremheb, Amon

“conducted his son in ‘the way ( tour) behind the wall,’” first embracing him and then

transferring to him everlasting dominion;

after being thus “led behind the wall,” the

new king leaves “the great house” and so completes the whole complex of ordinances

called “going up to the temple.” 224

Haremheb was conducted to the ỉp.t-sw.t,

that he might enter the presence of Amon,

from whom he would receive his

kingship. 225 An ỉp.t-sw.t is a secret part of a palace or temple shut off from the rest and

made inaccessible (usually by curtains or

hangings). 226 The purpose of temple veils was specifically to shut off more sacred

areas from access by those not authorized to

enter them. 227 When “the venerable Lady of Denderah”—Hathor in the role of the

celestial Nut—united herself to her father Re

at the New Year, the meeting and embrace

took place in the topmost room or on the roof

of the temple, where we find her standing

under a heaven mounted on thin columns or

stands, between which curtains were draped

—perhaps the first mention of theatrical

curtains. 228 The same combination of images meets us in the Coffin Texts, 229 where in “the temples which Re has made, … the

enclosing horizon is the numbering ( ḥsb.t) of the columns. … Its beams are the arms of

Nut, which make the wakening of Osiris. Its

door ( tȝỉ.t) is the ḫt.t of Ptah, which Tait herself has woven, where Re appears in the

eastern part of the sky.” 230

Tait’s fabric is the “motherly embrace” of

protective, life-giving heat, 231 for Tait is the goddess of weaving, and “the excellent

works of Tait” include not only the sacred

partition but also the liturgical garments,

bandelettes, and wrappings of the dead as

well. 232 With appropriate ideograms, tȝỉ.t means “a door in the temple” or “the

goddess of weaving”; 233 in the Coffin Texts the word means “a kind of curtain” and later

“mummy bands.” 234 Even when the ritual

wrappings are provided by the Two Ladies (Isis and Nephthys), they are still “made by

Tait.” 235 In the mysteries of many sects, wrapping in a holy garment is the equivalent

of embracing, 236 and the close association of Tait with a ritual embrace appears in an

Abydos text: “Amon-Re … takes his filet

(bandage) with the bandelette admait

[ ỉdmỉ.t] upon the two arms of Tait for his own flesh; the god reunites himself with the

god, the god wraps the god in the embrace

(bosom) called admat. ”237 In the Book of Caverns the emergence of the candidate

through the last barrier is called “the coming

out by this great god from the confining

darkness(es) of the qrr.t (cavern) of Osiris, while Tait, who has done great things, offers

her two arms.” 238 Bearing in mind that all the works of Tait are weaving, we proceed to

the next phase: “Re speaks to the qrr.t of Tait: Thou, Tait, hast ( or Tait has) received

me; thou, Tait, hast reached out thine arms toward me; behold I have passed by ( ʿpỉ, to pass on through), my ba following after.” 239

Finally the drama closes with the

declaration, “Tait hath received me, thou hast

given me thy two arms, … I am concerned

with my posterity.” 240 There is a rich mixture of images in Coffin Text 44: “You don the

holy garment ( wʿb.w, swaddling clothes) in the tent of purification ( ỉbw), 241 with one who lives in his Tait ( tȝy.t, wrapping or veil of some sort).242 Encircled is this Osiris by Orion, Sothis, and the duat. They place thee in the enfolding ( ẖnw) arms of thy mother; they protect thee from the wrath of the

dead. ”243 The two arms do not represent a confining embrace, but a means of passage to

the beyond, as in Book of the Dead chapter

26, a passage also found in the tomb of

Tutankhamun: “The two arms of the temple

are open. Geb, the Prince, throws wide his

limbs. He opens thy two eyes. … I have taken away thy veil over thee. … Lift thy

head; … stand on thy feet.” 244 This refers to the rite of removing the veil, called “the

opening of the face,” according to Moret,

which is an abbreviated form of the Opening

of the Mouth.245

If the earliest rites of the Egyptians,

including the mysteries of Abydos, were

performed in tents, as there is good reason to

believe,246 the importance of a woven partition at the holy of holies is not hard to

understand. In the oldest known temples,

veils shutting off the inner “priest’s room”

were matting screens between wooden

posts. 247 Here Jewish and Christian parallels, occasionally betraying Egyptian

affinities as they do, may be of some help.

In Israel, “the ark and the tabernacle, the

miniature temple and the tent, are analogous

institutions.” 248 Since the stone temple was

built merely to shelter the original shrine, which was a tent containing the holy objects,

the latter were always preserved at the holy

center of the temple behind a woven

partition. The church fathers were intrigued

by the setup. According to Theophylactus,

the first veil separated the court of the

people and the bronze altar from the tent

where only the priests could enter. Then

there was another veil inside before the Holy

of Holies. Through this veil the high priest

could go once a year; it was called a “tent”

because God tented there. 249 The Bible makes it clear, André Pelletier observes, that

there were other veils in the temple which

were simply repetitions of the one really

important veil, that of the holy of holies.250

The significant thing about the veil of the

temple, Pelletier finds, is what lies on the

other side of it—namely, the caeli secreta,

the secrets of the heavens, for the veil is the

last barrier to the infinite—what lies beyond is endless space ( adiakleiston) ,

“uninterrupted passage, devoid of all

obstacles”; it opens out to “the immensity of

the heavenly spaces,” which is why it is not

a door but a veil, and a large theatrical one

at that.251

Since the temple structure had a cosmic

significance, the veil did too, as the Talmud

makes clear. 252 Shutting off the adyton, or holy of holies, it would mark, of course, the

boundary between the worlds. The ancient

priests were called seers in the Old

Testament ( ḥōzîm) as among the Egyptians

( mȝ ȝ.w); it was their custom “in their seeing to cover themselves or shut themselves off”;

hence their epithet of dhul khimār, “men of the veil,” and hence also, according to Julius

Wellhausen, the importance of the covering,

tent, or booth to separate vulnerable mortals

from the consuming glory of worlds beyond

when it was made accessible to the seer. 253

Josephus described the veil of the temple as

a cosmic barrier, composed of the four

elements: “the red silk represented fire,

byssus (linen) the earth, the jewels the air,

and the purple the sea, and thus they

correspond to the four elements. Depicted

thereon (on the veil) was the whole sky with

all its appointments.” 254

Figure 140. Re-Horakhty, shown here twice, is all

wrapped up like Sokar and seated upon the Stone of Truth. He sails over the heavens right into a sea of bright golden stars on a dark background, seen

through a mysterious aperture. Behind him is a door,

which depicts a barrier along the way to the temple.

P. Ani (BD 133, 134), ca. 1250 B.C. BM 10470

© Copyright The British Museum.

For the Egyptians, too, infinity lies beyond

the veil; in the culminating rites “it seemed

that we had reached the end of the other

world; but now we enter into a new region.”

Osiris is there, and yet it is the sun-god who

fills the place with light, and “the closing

phrases are solar” as the triumphant imagery

of the coronation takes over (fig. 140). 255

The sem- sleeper is separated by a veil from his father in the preexistence; he is called the

one “whose face is veiled,” referring to his

mummy wrappings. 256 The Coffin Texts refer to one’s defunct relatives as “they who are

within his veil ( ỉmyw wnḫ.t),” who are to be gathered together to one by sealing ( ḫtm) . 257

Something like this seems to be suggested by

the Zohar: “For the man who is privileged to

have children in this world will through them

be worthy to enter ‘behind the partition’ in the world to come.” 258

There is a persistent tendency to compare

the veil of the temple and the ritual garment,

if not actually to equate them. 259 Such a connection is found in the Ramesseum

drama, which identifies the sacred garments

both with their wearers and with the shrine:

“The thigh of Seth (is) the four-ply weave,

the white chapel. … Seth (is) the six-ply

weave, the beautiful house. Horus says to

Osiris: My father must embrace me ( dmỉ ỉr,

‘unite with,’ ‘used specifically of clothing’).

Osiris (is) purple ( ỉdmỉ) cloth (i.e., both as king and contestant). 260 Horus says to Osiris: The panther [skin? cf. the panther-skin

garment always worn by officiating priests]

unites thy limbs, … the eye (of Horus is) ssf-

cloth,” 261 equivalent to the panther-goddess, here representing mummy wrappings,

according to Sethe. 262 The Zohar tells us that

the rams’ skins and badgers’ skins of the tabernacle “are a garment which protects a

garment,” the inner garment being “the

curtains (of the Tabernacle), …

corresponding to the skin upon the flesh. ”263

Speaking of the rending of the veil of the

temple, the Jewish-Christian Testament of

Levi calls it “the garment ( endyma) of the temple”264 and thereby, Marc Philonenko observes, “introduces us into a world of

quite mysterious speculation,” for here “the

veil of the temple is considered the

personified garment of the sanctuary.” 265

Marinus de Jonge says it “refers to the

garment of the angel, or of the personified

temple.” 266 When Israel apostatized, the veil of the temple was rent—“so that it would no

longer hide our iniquity,” as Levi explains

it. 267 According to the important Untitled Text in the Bruce Codex, the holy garment of

the initiate and the veil of the temple have

the same significance; they are both symbols of obedience, both representing that virtue

which separates the initiate from the wicked

world, even as it separates existence from

nonexistence, the pure from the impure, the

elect from all that contaminates and injures

—and the two actually follow the same

design. 268 The creation apocryphon from Egypt tells how in the preexistence it was

provided that a veil should be placed

between the true, timeless, preexistent

worlds and this material world and universe

which are modeled after them.269 “There is a veil ( parapetasma, lit, hanging, partition) which separates mankind from that which is

above. ”270

Since the Egyptian mysteries are a journey

from the darkness into the light, it is to be

expected that they end in something like a

blaze of glory. 271 And indeed, the celebrants emerge from the temple, either at the highest

point or the main entrance, into the dazzling

light of the sun. 272

Figure 141. In the culminating scene—the top register on the east wall of the central hall of the cenotaph of Seti I—that monarch kneels as he is about to “see the god”; then he gives an accounting (presents an image of Maat) to the ram-headed figure which represents the highest glory (the noonday sun); finally he enters the presence of Osiris himself and, “seeing the god, gives praise four times.” Restored drawing of

cenotaph of Seti I, 1290 B.C. After Frankfort,

Cenotaph of Seti I, 1: pl. 73.

Seeing the God: The Culmination

of the Mysteries

The commonly expressed goal and object of visiting the temple is “to see the god” (fig.

141). Thus the initiate prays to Amon-Re to

embrace him and introduce him into celestial

regions to look upon Aton.273 The welcoming inscription on temple portals

invites the worshipper (after being properly

purified and clothed): “Come with me into

the House of God and behold thy father of

the variegated feathers” (the “speckled bird”

is the embodiment of glory).274 An inscription on a temple statue designated as

an intermediary between god and man says:

“Ye people of Karnak who would see Amon,

come to me! For I am the go-between ( whm,

guide, herald, introducer) of that god!” 275

Among other examples given by Hermann

Kees is an inscription of Piankhi, telling how

that king was purified, was clothed, received

his token of rebirth, and mounted the stairs of

the temple of Re at Heliopolis on his way

“to behold the god. ”276

The final glory naturally culminates in

Heliopolis, the seat of the sun-worship,

where it all began; the final approval of the

initiate is that he has become a true

Heliopolitan:277 “His body is in the great company of the gods in the House of the

Aged Prince in Heliopolis. ”278 Interestingly enough, the Heliopolitan motif carries over

into Jewish and Christian mysteries, the

outstretched hand of Jupiter Heliopolitanus

—a usage “in the ceremonial of his

mysteries” —being recognized by scholars

as the source of the Latin benediction (fig.

142).279 It is by this handclasp, wrote Henri Leclercq, “that the deceased is received into

the celestial banquet”; and he traces both the

Asia Minor and Syrian versions of the rites

back to the synagogue. 280

Figure 142. This late Roman bronze shows Jupiter

Heliopolitanus with his uplifted right arm. Restored drawing of gilded bronze statue, fifteen inches high, ca. A.D. 150. After Louvre AO 19534. Courtesy of

Louvre Museum.

Having fulfilled all requirements, the

Egyptian initiate is free to take any form he

desires: “He mingles with the universe; he transforms himself into god281 on his way of progress toward the ultimate perfection.” 282

“When the soul is on the way in its search

for God,” wrote Gregor of Nyssen, “it

progresses without ceasing, constantly being

transformed into a form ever more glorious,

and so it passes from glory to glory. ”283 He is commenting on 2 Corinthians 3:18: “But

we all, with unveiled face beholding as in a

mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed

into the same image from glory to glory, even

as from the Lord of spirits.”

Properly speaking, one did not go

“through” the temple—in one door and out

another—for one enters and leaves by the

same door, but by moving in opposite

directions, as Helck makes clear in a

diagram.284 The Two Ways of Light and Darkness are but one way after all, as the

wise Heraclitus said: “The up-road and the

down-road are one” ;285 which one depends on the way we are facing.

The classic robe of the initiate throughout

the East has always been and still is the pure

white286 wrap thrown over the shoulder, which also represents an embrace;287

everything should be white. 288 The well-known shifting of garments from left to right

in initiation ceremonies (e.g., of the tassel on

the mortarboard at graduations) is a

reminder, according to Saint Hippolytus of

Rome, that “nature consists of opposites,

good and bad, even as right and left—light

and darkness, night and day, life and

death.” 289

The Coptic writings have a good deal to

say about the curtains or veils that separate

the various creations and universes, a

concept found in our Pearl of Great Price:

“millions of earths like this … would not be

a beginning to the number of thy creations;

and thy curtains are stretched out still”

(Moses 7:30). All things are set off by

“veils,” and no one may go beyond the veil

that marks the limit of his knowledge without

dire consequences; it was because Pistis

Sophia went beyond her “degree” and,

becoming ambitious, “looked behind the

veil” that she fell from glory, 290 and Adam after the fall could not see behind the veil.291

Only Jesus passes through all the gates and

all the veils from world to world at every

level. 292 The rending of the veil of the temple marked the Lord’s passage between

the upper and the lower worlds, according to

the Testament of Benjamin—through the veil he mounted to his glory in heaven, and

through the veil he descended to help the

spirits in prison. 293 God sits behind a series ( taxis) of veils, which are “drawn before the great king” and which can be approached

only by passing tests at preliminary gates;294

hence the only way by which one can enter into the presence of the Father is “to pass

through the veil,” which veil must be

approached through three preliminary steps

or doors. “If you want to go to the Father,” it

says, “you must pass through the veil. … The

watchers will yield to you when they see the

seal of the Father, ”295 who sits veiled by light, according to another Coptic work. 296

An early Jewish-Christian logion reports

that when Joseph married Mary, he

ministered to her “from behind the veil and

conversed with her [in the temple] ( min

waraʾa ḥijāb wa-yukallimuhā [ fi-al-

haikal]). ”297 Gerardus van der Leeuw has noted that the antiphonal speeches in the

early Jewish-Christian Apostolic

Constitutions resemble very closely the

questions and responses “at the veil in the

heathen mysteries,” the latter being derived

from Egypt.298

The Gospel of Philip depicts the rending of the veil not as the abolition of the temple

ordinances, as the church fathers fondly

supposed, but of the opening of those

ordinances to all the righteous of Israel, “in

order that we might enter into … the truth of

it.” “The priesthood can still go within the

veil with the high priest (i.e., the Lord).” We

are allowed to see what is behind the veil,

and “we enter into it in our weakness,

through signs and tokens which the world

despises. ”299 Though the church fathers insisted that the rending of the veil meant its

abolition by spiritualizing the temple, the

fact that Christian churches everywhere

retained veils, which they thought of as

continuing the veil of the temple, shows that

Christians could never rid themselves of the

age-old tradition. 300

According to a very old Coptic Christian

writing, when Christ took the twelve apart

on a mountain after the resurrection, he spoke to them in a strange tongue, and he

spoke to his Father and “gave the twelve his

right hand and sealed us”; and then he went

within the tabernacle (tent, skēnē, veil) and prayed to the Father to give them a blessing

for time and eternity. 301 In passing through the veil to the Father, according to 1 Jeu, one must show certain seals and tokens to the

guardian of the veil. 302 Those who do so in this world, the Pistis Sophia assures us again

and again, will not have to do it in the

next. 303 The Gospel of Philip glories that the Saints are now allowed to see what is

behind the veil: “we enter into it in our

weakness, through signs and tokens which

the world despises.” 304 Almost the same statement is found in the important

Kephalaia, where Jesus says, “These five

things (ordinances) about which you asked

me appear to the world to be silly and trivial

( euo nthe nnetsabk euo nkoui) and yet they are great and estimable. … These five tokens

( mmeine) are the ordinances ( mystērion) of the first man.” 305 It goes on to explain that the five tokens, which the first man

originated among the Godhead, were brought

by him when he came down to this earth and

enable him to return to his home on high;306

also, “they were brought to this world

through the preaching of an apostle,” by

which “men learned them and established

them in their midst.” 307 These five things are the marks of his church and include the

greeting of peace by which one becomes a

son of peace, the grasp of the right hand

which brings one into the church, followed

by the embrace by which one becomes a

son.308 The whole Mandaean ritual complex with its endless washings, garments, ritual

meals, embraces, grips, and crownings is

reminiscent of the Egyptian endowment, and

Drower, the principal authority on the

subject, long ago called attention to the

common prehistoric origin of both. 309

Figure 143. This sequence from a temple at Karnak

shows how the royal initiation culminated in ritual embraces. In each scene the words of instruction are written over the heads of the speakers. First comes the washing or baptism, then the bestowal of crown and throne; then the candidate is conducted by

ministers of “life, health, strength, and joy” to Thoth, the master of ceremonies, who introduces him at the last shrine where he receives the paternal embrace that confirms his appearing in glory “on the throne of his father Re.” Finally the maternal embrace of

Amaunet, who says, “I nurse thee with my milk.”

Thus the rites end in the intimate embrace of the

primordial family. Restored drawing from photographs and drawings of barque shrine, Karnak, ca. 320 B.C.

Description of the Embrace

From the very first, as Rusch points out,

the text makes it clear that a real physical

embrace took place.310 At his coronation, the new king, following his purification, was led

by the hand of two gods (priests in masks),

one of whom was Atum, to his throne; from

there he proceeded to the holy of holies “to

behold his father,” who embraced him and

crowned him (fig. 143). 311 It was a formal embrace with both parties standing. 312 The original meaning of both ḥp.t and sḫn, according to Moret, seems to be “to open

out, to hold open,” and it refers “not only [to

the position of] the arms … but to the legs as

well, whether walking or standing.” Sḫn, he writes, means “to stand firmly with the legs

apart,” “to take a posture with legs

spread.” 313 In the murals we see the king awaiting his son in a position of anticipation:

“the king is in a standing position, his arms swung slightly outward ( ballants), leaning slightly forward, as if preparing to take the

statue (in this case) respectfully into his

arms. ”314 In Papyrus Louvre N. 3292, the candidate stands “in a small white apron,

which is covered by another longer,

transparent apron, … before Osiris, his arms

thrust forward ( ballants)”; Osiris is

represented as half a mummy, white below

and green above, holding the crook and

flail. 315

Figure 144. In this elaborate shrine, Seti I, embraced by Horus, takes the hand of Osiris on his throne,

placed on the Stone of Truth decorated with ʿnḫ, ḏd, wȝs. Reconstructed drawing, tomb of Seti I, ca. 1290

B.C.

In the tomb of Seti I, the god and the king

embrace each other (fig. 144). 316 Like the embrace, “the rite of ‘giving the hand’ or

‘rite of the hand’ … is the expression of

familiarity, of equality, of sympathy, of love,

of protection. … It is the expression of the attribution of kingly rank and vital power to

the reborn king. ”317 The best-known handshake in the ancient world was the

taking of the hand of the (image of) Marduk

by the man who thereby became king; this

seizing of the hand was an exchange of grips,

according to Svend Pallis. 318 The Egyptian practice is indicated in the Amduat: “This

great god (the pharaoh) says: ‘Noble One,

put forth thy hand. … Let thy voice come

forth properly from thy throat. Living One,

open thy enfolding! I have come to give light

to one sitting in darkness.’” 319 Moret and Georges Legrain use identical words when

describing how, in the coronation embrace,

“the god has stretched forth his hands out

through [a sort of] sheath ( or covering) and clasps the king against his breast.” 320

Figure 145. Horus leads Ani into the presence of

Osiris. P. Ani, ca. 1250 B.C. BM 10470 © Copyright The British Museum.

In a rite designated as the ḥp.t rsw qnỉ=f,

we see how the pharaoh at his coronation,

here called “the good god Sesostris (i.e., the

father of the initiate), wearing the white

nemes (linen) headdress, enters into the naos (inner shrine) of the god Ptah and embraces

him. The god reaches out his hands from his

covering and clasps the king to his breast.321

In another coronation ceremony we see the

king entering the shrine to be greeted by

Atum, Ptah, Amon, and Osiris: “The god has

stretched his hands out through [a sort of]

sheath ( or covering) and clasps the king

against his breast.” 322 This god, according to these ordinances ( sḫr.w, rites, customs),”

says the Book of Caverns, “shall then thrust

his two arms through ( ḥr, upon) his secret ḏbȝ.t, which the gods do not know. ”323 What is the “secret ḏbȝ.t”? Piankoff renders it as

“mysterious envelope,” or “mysterious

covering.” 324 The root meaning of the word is to “stop up” a way or passage, barricade

(hence perhaps ḏb.t, “brick”). With another determinative it means “pad,” or a “garment

worn by a god”; hence ḏbȝ.t is “a robing

room” or “sarcophagus.” It also means a mat

of leaves. 325

A dramatic painting in the Papyrus of Ani

shows Horus conducting an awed Ani into

the presence of Osiris, who is seated on a

maat- platform (sometimes with steps instead of a slope) under a baldachin representing a

green mound of earth (fig 145); in front of him hangs the msḫn.t, the skin garment of resurrection which, as we have noted, has

the same significance as the veil. Horus is

leading the candidate by one hand while he

raises the other in salutation, saying: “I have

come into thy presence, Wennefer. I have

brought to thee the Osiris Ani, his heart

having been found faithful ( ỉb=f mȝʿ) , having come forth from the testing (balance) devoid

of offense to any god or goddess. ”326 The approach to the shrine is variously

described; Moret even gives it the special

title of “the royal ascent to the sanctuary,”

which is the “final consecration: … the

embrace of the god, master of the temple in

which is the ‘chamber of adoration.’”327

Even in the Ani picture, a short stairway or

ramp leads up to the shrine, indicating the

ascent.328 In a relief showing the installation of Ramses II on the throne, “we see the

young king being led into the presence of Atum by Horus and another deity. … Next

we see Ramesses standing, being embraced

by Atum, who is enthroned,” 329 Ramses being very much alive, hailed by a row of

Anubis figures who give the hnw-sign, the

acknowledgment of divinity, with one knee

to the ground, one arm at the square, and the

other held in a V-shape on the breast.330 In Papyrus Louvre N. 3292, it is Anubis who

conducts the initiate to the veil—or, rather,

pushes him toward it, for the candidate is

understandably afraid. 331 In early times, the initiate, having fulfilled all requirements,

was introduced by “the Old One” to the

doorkeeper of Osiris, called the inspector of

records. 332 When the king enters the sanctuary for the first time, at the completion

of the temple, he performs an act exactly

resembling what is done at the door of the

church at Easter in the Eastern Orthodox

rites—namely, he knocks three times on the door with his white mace (see p. 272, fig.

91), enters, illuminates the shrine with

sacred fire, and performs a series of

lustrations and circumambulations. 333

In Book of the Dead 125, the principal

source of our Breathings Book, the dead is

told by the ḥtp.w, or parts of the door, that they will not let him through until he names

them; ḥtp.w also means “embraces,” signs

which the dead, apparently, must also

identify. The embrace at this particular point

is called the qȝb.t (which means “enfolding,”

“breast,” “knee”), which Osiris gave to Shu

as a special endowment ( sa). 334 “The name of the door (or embrace) is qȝb.t, opening or parting (breast, knee) of Shu, which he gave

in the embrace ( Schutz) of Osiris.” 335

During the embrace, the “outstretched

hand” of the embracer is placed “along [the]

neck or … back” of the other party. 336 To

explain this, Moret suggests that the hand is

“execut[ing] magnetic passes the length of

the neck and back,” with the idea of

imparting “the fluid of life ( sa ankh) and divine power. ”337 “The god who gave the sa (fluid) to the king took him in his arms and

made his open hand pass along the neck and

back of the pharaoh.” 338 E. A. Wallis Budge has the same idea: it was “passes” down the

neck and back that transmitted the “vital

power, or ‘fluid of life.’” 339 “Thou hast made passes which place life around the

statue-image of the Osiris N. … Thy fluid of

life is round about him. ”340

Moret concluded that it must be a sort of

“fluid of life” or “magnetic fluid” which the

god imparted when he passed his hand over

the back of the initiate;341 only by that act was it possible “to make of a man, a dead

person, or a god a living being endowed

with the breath of life and with sa [the fluid

of life]” —that is, to impart physical and spiritual imperishability. 342 This is borne out in passages from the Pyramid Texts,343 the fluid itself being identified with spirit, light,

and ka. 344 What is imparted in the embrace of Shu is thus both the breath and the fluid of

life.345 It was “solar fluid, … the life power itself.” 346

An important class of statues of seated

officials—found, significantly, not in their

tombs but in the temples—all sport a

standard inscription placed vertically in a

strip down the center of the back: “The city

god of NN has placed behind him and before

him (i.e., around him) his ka, being face-to-face with him ( m bȝḥ=f); … his [two legs]

are not out of place, his heart does not fail

him ( ḫsf) . ” 347 The seated position of the figures may be an embryonic or fetal

anticipation of rebirth. 348

Words Spoken at the End

The ritual embrace does not take place in

silence. In the Pyramid Texts, as Horus and

his father, Osiris, “hold fast to each other,”

they exchange some short sentences which

Rusch has called an Umarmungslitanei, or

recitation accompanying the embrace, in

which, strangely enough, the father and son

exchange identical formulas, the short

sentences being arranged facing each other

and reading in opposite directions in the

text. 349 “At the supreme moment of initiation,” according to van der Leeuw,

there took place an exchange “of a Question

and a Response … probably spoken in an

undertone both by the priest and the initiand,

perhaps … at the door of the Holiest.” This

was “at the last admission,” and the words

exchanged served “as liturgical passwords;

they could serve as such by their character as

‘mysteries,’ … as summaries of the life of

the god and its imitation,” through phases of which the candidate had just been

introduced.350 A variation is found on the stela of Piankhi where, at his coronation, the

king enters the temple at Heliopolis as an

ordinary citizen for “mysterious interviews

between god and king”: he mounts the stairs,

goes to the great naos entirely alone, pulls

the bolts open, opens the shrine, and sees his

father in the temple of the Benben, at the

conclusion of the interview—and only then

—“he receives from the god, his father, the

diadem and [ was-]sceptre. ”351

The meeting takes place at the “barrier.”

The candidate or his guide opens the

interview with the request, “Glorious one,

reach me thy hand, stretch forth thy hand

from the dph. … Let thy voice come

forth.” 352 From behind the partition, Osiris, conversing with the candidate, “puts his two

arms upon his mysterious covering.” 353 The

final door is not solid because one must speak through it: “Ye who are without the

veil ( ỉmy tȝ wr.t)! O guardians of the

partition through which one speaks in your

presence!” 354 The gate-determinative is not a door but an ornamental panel. What passes

through is a series of questions and

responses: “Behold, I shall be with Osiris,

and my perfection shall be his perfection

among the great gods. He shall speak unto

me with the words (speech, voice) of men; I

shall listen, and he shall repeat to me the

words of the gods. I have come equipped

(prepared, qualified). Thou makest to

approach (thee) those who love thee. I am an

akh who is better equipped than any akh. ”355

In another version: “I am with Osiris. I speak

out loud what he says to me, and what I say

he repeats. I arrive as a well-prepared akh,

returning the truth back to him who loves it. I

am the well-prepared deceased … the word

of the dead Osiris is truth.” 356

Plainly, the initiate had to undergo some

sort of test. It was more than the mere

password at the other gates: “the symbols

are certainly not devised as pass- or

watchwords. But as certainly they seem to

have served as such.” They were used “at

the supreme moment of initiation, just as in

[the] christian cult. They are exchanged at

the last admission. Exchanged, for … they

must have consisted of a Question and a

Response.” 357 This may have been the origin of those “What is that?” passages which

introduce mythical explanations for forgotten

or misunderstood ordinances—Eberhard

Otto attests twenty-seven parallels between

Coffin Text 335 and Book of the Dead

chapter 17. 358 The importance of knowing the names of things and giving those names

when challenged is more than the mere idea

of the password; it is, according to Derchain,

nothing less than the logical source of “the entire mechanism of Egyptian mythology and

liturgy” —namely, “the law which makes of

the name a veritable attribute of the thing

named.” 359 The exchange of code words is a means of conveying profound knowledge by

both words and signs. As the god thrusts his

arms through the “mysterious envelope, ”360

he conveys things to come ( yywʿ.w) or things which come through the partition as

responses, “things that come again.” 361 This is pretty confusing, and the Egyptian scribes

have tried to supply an explanation: “The

ḏbȝ.t (partition) is of such a nature ( sḫrw) that it conveys the greatest secret to be found

in the … duat.” 362 There is a Jewish tradition, repeated in the Christian Coptic

Gospel of Philip, that it is behind the veil that the true secret of how this physical

universe is run may be learned. 363 The most discussed of such partitions is the kikkišu,

the “reed hut” or “reed fence” or both, through which the Babylonian Noah in very

ancient times “received instructions about

which he seeks further light.” 364 To quote Lambert, “One may suspect that originally

this mode of communication was nothing

more than whispering through the reed hut in

which Atra-ḫasis lived. In this way Ea

himself did not betray the divine secret, for it

was the reed wall which actually passed on

the words to Atra-ḫasis.”

In the first Nineveh version, the flood hero

is counseled to save himself through a law of

consecration: “Reed house, reed house,

wall, wall! Reed house listen, wall hear!

Man from Shurippak, … Construct a house,

build a ship! Part with riches, seek the life,

Abandon property and save the life! Bring

living creatures of all kind into the ship!” 365

Frankfort has suggested that the Egyptian qnỉ

resembles “the reed capes and the reed

shelters” of prehistoric Egypt. 366

“How do the demons and the ministering

angels know what goes on in the universe?”

asks the Talmudist, and he answers, “They

hear it behind the (heavenly) veil, just as the

ministering angels do. ”367 Rabbi Meir declared,” I have just heard (a voice) behind

the (heavenly) veil calling out: “Repent, ye

wayward sons! ”368—meaning that all Israel should repent. In this case, the rabbinical

editors have supplied the word heavenly

since they do not recognize the rites of the

temple. Describing the great holy complex at

Delphi, Heliodorus reports the most

important feature of all, where “the Pythian

speaks [from behind a veil] out of the holy of

holies ( adyton) . ” 369

Figure 146. The last king of the Twenty-Fifth Dynasty receives the royal embrace from Amon-Re, who

says, “I give to thee all life and power.” The

characters on the right are various symbols of

embracing: The two fans flanked the king protectively when he went forth; the two parts of heaven, each

with a seal, are followed by the Serqet emblem with its counterweight, which hangs on the breast to impart breath and life; the two open arms protrude from the djed-symbol of strength and endurance, thus completing the usual trio of ʿnḫ, ḏd, wȝs. Restored drawing from the stela of Tantamani, Karnak, ca. 660

B.C. After Jéquier, “À propos d’une stèle

éthiopienne,” 170.

The ʿnḫ, Ḏd, and Wȝs Formula

The words spoken are most commonly

designated in the reliefs by three enigmatic

symbols: the ankh, the was-scepter, and the djed-column (fig. 146), showing the three

virtues of the creative sun” : “life, power,

and stability.” 370 Indeed, after the Nineteenth Dynasty, the word for “ritual embrace” was

regularly followed by these three symbols in

a set formula. 371 In the royal embrace at the coronation and sed-festival, the beloved one

“gives all ʿnḫ, ḏd, wȝs, and health [every]

day.” 372 There are variations on the theme.

As Ptah the creator embraces Ramses III, he

says to the new king, “I have received thee in

an embrace of gold; I enfold thee with

permanence, stability, and satisfaction; I

endow thee with health and joy of heart; I

immerse thee in rejoicing, joy, gladness of

heart and delight forever.” 373 Another temple

relief shows Amon whispering into the new king’s ear, as he embraces him, “I give thee

all ʿnḫ and wȝs. ” 374 And in another, as “the god reaches his hand out through the

covering and clasps the king to his bosom,”

we see behind him, written on the wall, the

“words to be spoken: The giving of all life,

endurance, authority, health, joy (expansion

of heart) to the king of the South and North

Kheper-Ka-Ra.” 375 In the crucial seventh hour of the Amduat, in reply to the request to

receive his embrace, the “Glorious One”

says: “Life belongs to thee. … Thou hast

strength on earth. Mayest thou be exalted in

thy posterity ( lit. those who come after thee).

To this the person addressed responds: “O

my posterity! Living souls … who came out

of me to take on the flesh of Atum! ”376

In all these last examples, we are told at

least some of the actual words spoken

through the partition. Though sometimes

appearing in combination with other things, the three symbols— ʿnḫ, ḏd, and wȝs— are the normal combination in this context. They

express, according to Hellmut Brunner, “all

life, all endurance, and all power” and, taken

together, represent “the total fulness of

divine gifts” thought to describe the pharaoh

in earlier times, but represented as the object

of his search and the purpose of the

ceremonies in Ptolemaic times. 377 Forming a unit, they are accompanied by “all health like

Re.” 378 The situation is depicted in a number of reliefs showing Ptah as the Most High

God, sitting or standing within a shrine but

facing an open door, showing that in these

Osiris shrines the god really stands behind a

partition; he is shown completely covered by

the long white “Sokar”-covering, from

which, however, his hands protrude, holding

the symbols of ʿnḫ, ḏd, and wȝs. 379 Sethe has noted that the combination of door and arm

can only mean “holding one’s arm open to receive another.” 380

What is common to all the bestowal

formulas is, surprisingly enough, not a

spiritual endowment, as we would expect, or

lofty, abstract, and mysterious phrases, but

the simple declarative or optative sentence

promising or endowing the initiate with the

earthly gifts of physical strength and

enduring vigor and posterity. The words are

not written out but are represented by the

three symbols, which in this context may

well have a special significance.

First, there is the ankh, or life sign, the best-known Egyptian symbol. The sȝ-

symbol, which Moret identifies with the

giving of the “vital fluid,” always implies a

gift of life, according to him, and is in fact

usually accompanied by the ankh-symbol. 381

“The God embrace[s] him and transmit[s] to

him the divine fluid. … This exchange …

[is] given … reciprocally, is the very foundation of the Egyptian cult: ceaselessly

the king offers to the god and receives from

him the gift of life in all the rites of the

sacred service. ”382 Moret wonders, indeed, whether the ankh-symbol and the sȝ- symbol, which look a good deal alike, may not be the

same thing. 383 The nature of the sȝ as a reed hut or partition is pretty well established; it

is the ankh that makes the trouble. “Is it a crude human silhouette … ?” Moret asks, “a

mirror … ?” A Punic sun-figure depicting

“sun, sky, and triangular rays?” 384 Heinrich Schäfer, who has studied it most thoroughly,

concludes that its nature is still unexplained;

he rejects the usual explanation that it

represents a shoestring and suggests that it is

perhaps a knot in a sash, with ends hanging

down, like the “blood-of-Isis” symbol which

it closely resembles. 385 Schäfer concludes that the “blood-of-Isis” symbol was, in fact,

a derivation from the older ankh-sign, both signifying simply “life,” though why they

mean that and what they originally

represented he is at a loss to explain.386 In an earlier work, however, Alfred Wiedemann

gives a possible clue when he points out that

as soon as an Egyptian baby was born, the

gods presented him first of all with the sign

of “life” (the ankh) and “divine protection”

(the sȝ), the former representing a knotted belly-band (Gürtelband), the latter a bound-up mat. 387 Like the placenta ( ḫn sw) , which had to be preserved most carefully if one

expected to be born again, 388 this ankh-

symbol was inseparable from a person

throughout his lifetime and was always worn

as an amulet. It was attached to or over the

navel of both male and female babies as the

sign of life. 389 This would suggest that the mysterious ankh, by all accounts a knotted cord, was the navel string. It is interesting

that ankh also means “oath,” the idea being, as Jan Bergman suggests, that one swears by

one’s life, so that if the oath is broken, so

likewise “the cord of life” —the umbilical

cord—is broken.390

Figure 147. Horus and Anubis support Osiris as a

djed- pillar, having wrapped him with linen bandlets.

Bibliothèque Nationale de France.

The djed-symbol of durability was

commonly believed to represent the

backbone of Osiris, 391 yet it is so closely associated with the ankh and “blood of Isis”

amulets as to be identified with them392 as

just another form of the ankh. 393 Schäfer rejects various explanations, concluding that

in the end it too, like the ankh-sign, is “full of every kind of riddle. ”394 Like the “blood of Isis” and sȝ-tokens with which it often occurs, it stands for “protection,” 395 while both symbols represent “life.” 396 How they became identified with Isis or Nut remains

as great a mystery as how the djed-column

became identified with Osiris (fig. 147),

according to Schäfer. 397 All of which does not prevent it from being the sacred relic, the

backbone of Osiris, 398 and, as such, the symbol of strength and endurance which it

always remained. As early as Pyramid Text

357 §§585, 589, we read: “You have folded

your arms around [Horus] so that his bones

expand (with life); … Horus recognizes his

father in you,” where the embrace puts life in

the bones.399

In royal heraldry, the djed-symbol was regularly paired with the was-scepter at least from the Second Dynasty on. Schäfer equates

the latter symbol with “luck, ”400 but it is usually regarded as a sign of power,

“dominion, lordship.” 401 Equally common is the pairing of the was-scepter with the ankh-

sign in the set formula “life and rule,” which,

Bergman notes, is the king’s “permanent

epithet as the guarantee of his divine

nature. ”402 The wȝs- sign denotes “dominion, lordship, only in fixed expressions like ʿnḫ,

ḏdt, wȝs life, stability, dominion,” according to Alan Gardiner. 403 Brunner interprets the same formula, “all life, all endurance, all

power,” 404 and duly notes that the wȝs-sign

“has until now been only loosely grasped by

the experts,” the real explanation being given

at last by Erich Winter, who shows it to be

“the sign of the power charisma of the king”

—his divine power. 405 Gardiner suggests

this when he writes of the wȝs-symbol that

“it seems probable that it signifies ‘divine

power,’ and I propose the translation

‘dominion.’” When the wȝs-signs are poured over the king with the little ʿnḫ-signs at his baptism, “it would appear, accordingly, that

the rite was intended to transfer to Pharaoh a

goodly portion of the power of the divinities

who presided over the four quarters of the

globe.” 406 Moret suggests that the was-

scepter represented lightning transmitting life

from heaven to earth while demonstrating

that “the ‘power’ of Pharaoh is manifest in

the light of the lightning flash” ;407 Bergman also notes that the double symbol of ankh

and was is sometimes accompanied by a

milk jug, emphasizing that the rites, as a

bestowal of both physical and spiritual life

and strength, are a ceremonial rebirth.408 All the symbols mentioned here are basically

protective in nature409 and, hence, of special

value during childbirth, which would have been the one occasion on which Isis (never

wounded or suffering by any account) would

shed her blood. The birth motif is never far

away in the ritual embrace since the

Egyptians believed that the first embrace of

all was the “one-sided act in which Atum

pours life into the gods Shu and Tennut (the

first male and female beings) whom he had

created” 410—it was the moment of passing through the veil from one life and one world

to another.

Figure 148. This ancient Christian relief combines resurrection and ascension motifs in a way that

recalls Egyptian parallels. Note especially the

stretched-forth hand that receives the ascending One and the document that he holds. Such details are not described in biblical accounts; what is their source?

Ivory panel from a diptych, ca. A.D. 400. Courtesy of Bayerisches National Museum.

Thus taken together, the three signs that

appear in combination as the words of

bestowal at the ritual embrace— ʿnḫ, ḏd, wȝs

—originally stood for the navel string, the backbone of Osiris, and his priestly power,

and with the accompanying inscriptions—

which invariably promise health and strength

to the candidate—bring to mind the verses of

Proverbs 3:1–3, 8, strongly reminiscent of

the Egyptian Wisdom literature, and opening

with the typically Egyptian embrace of the

Two Maats.

The final and concluding rite of the ancient

initiation was the subject of a study by van

der Leeuw, who discovered that the non-

Christian and early Christian practices were

virtually identical. 411 In every case, the final rites, coming when “the initiand … is about

to enter the interior parts of the temple, ”412

consist of a summary of what has gone

before, taking the form of an exchange of

formulas which are “at the same time” a

statement of “creeds, liturgical formulas, and

passwords,” all befitting an ultimate rite de

passage. 413 It was an exchange of

“symbols,” a “Question and a Response …

probably spoken in an undertone both by the

priest and the initiand, perhaps … at the

door of the Holiest.” 414 Van der Leeuw’s object was to discover, from matching all the

texts, just what the ancients understood by a

“symbol,” and he concluded that it can be an

“emblem, … sign, device, watch-word,

token, mark, ticket ( tessera) , contribution, creed,” all these having one single idea in

common—that of “agreement,” of

covenant. 415 The symbols are exchanged in the concluding rite of the mysteries as a

means of identification—not as between

members meeting in the street, but the means

by which the initiate identified himself “as

someone whose life had been united to that

of the god” (fig. 148).416

Thus our Book of Breathings stays in the

game right to the end.

Notes

1. Philippe-Jacques de Horrack, “Le Livre des Respirations d’après les manuscrits du Musée du Louvre,” in

Oeuvres diverses, ed. Philippe Virey and Gaston Maspero, BE 17 (Paris: Leroux, 1907), 135–36.

2. Richard A. Parker, “The Joseph Smith Egyptian Papyri: Translations and Interpretations: The Book of Breathings (Fragment 1, The ‘Sensen’ Text, with Restorations from Louvre Papyrus 3284),” Dialogue 3/2 (1968): 98.

3. Klaus Baer, “The Breathing Permit of Hôr: A Translation of the Apparent Source of the Book of Abraham,”

Dialogue 3/3 (1968): 119–20.

4. Jean-Claude Goyon, Le Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279

(Cairo: IFAO, 1966), 65–66.

5. Leonard H. Lesko, “Some Observations on the Composition of the Book of Two Ways, ” Journal of the American Oriental Society 91 (1971): 41.

6. Leonard H. Lesko, The Ancient Egyptian Book of Two Ways (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), 75.

7. BD 125, in Adriaan de Buck, Egyptian Readingbook: Exercises and Middle Egyptian Texts (Leiden: Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten, 1963), 123.

8. BD 98–99, in Gertrud Thausing and Traudl Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch

(Papyrus Reinisch) der Papyrussammlung der

Österreichischen Nationalbibliothek (Cairo:

Österreichisches Kulturinstituts, 1969), 25–29, quotation on 29.

9. Adolf Rusch, “Ein Osirisritual in den Pyramidentexten,”

ZÄS 60 (1925): 26; Joachim Spiegel, “Das

Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” ASAE 53

(1956): 389; Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 38 n.

7.

10. BD 100, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 29–30.

11. Siegfried Schott, “Zum Weltbild der Jenseitsführer des neuen Reiches,” in Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, philologish-historische Klasse, 1965 (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1965), 197.

12. Book of Day, eighth hour, in Alexandre Piankoff, “Le Livre du Jour dans la tombe (no. 132) de Ramose,”

ASAE 41 (1942): 157.

13. Gertrud Thausing, Sein und Werden: Versuch einer Ganzheitsschau der Religion des Pharaonenreiches (Vienna: Stiglmayr, 1971), 213.

14. Joachim Spiegel, Das Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1971), 275.

15. Bruno H. Stricker, “De Egyptische Mysteriën: Pap.

Leiden T 32,” OMRO 34 (1953): 13–17; 37 (1956): 49–

56.

16. Wolfgang Helck, Die Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II. in Karnak (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1968), 1:75.

17. Helck, Die Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:27 (discussion of picture 23).

18. Gaballa A. Gaballa and Kenneth A. Kitchen, “The Festival of Sokar,” Or 38 (1969): 35–36; Siegfried Morenz, Ägyptische Religion (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1960), 150.

19. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 73.

20. Short Amduat, seventh hour, lines 148–60, in Erik Hornung, Das Amduat: Die Schrift des verborgenen Raumes (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1963–67), 3:31.

21. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 16.

22. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 19, table.

23. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 74.

24. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 42–43; Claas J. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals: Enactments of

Religious Renewal (Leiden: Brill, 1967), 70.

25. Neferhotep Inscription 23–24, in Max Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos: Ein Beitrag zur ägyptischen Religions- und

Literaturgeschichte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929), pl. 6.

26. P. Bremner-Rhind 18/3–19/7, in Raymond O. Faulkner, The Papyrus Bremner-Rhind (British Museum No.

10188) (Brussels: FERE, 1933), 35–37; Jean-Claude Goyon, “Le cérémonial pour faire sortir Sokaris: Papyrus Louvre I. 3079, col. 112–14,” RdE 20 (1968): 65–67; Raymond O. Faulkner, “The Bremner-Rhind Papyrus—

II,” JEA 23 (1937): 12–13.

27. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 61; see also

42–43.

28. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 61–64.

29. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 64–65.

30. Short Amduat, fifth and seventh hours, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:8–9, 14–17.

31. Short Amduat, seventh hour, lines 160–61, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:15.

32. Short Amduat, seventh hour, lines 177–78, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:16.

33. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 41.

34. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 70.

35. P. Louvre N. 3129 D/1–2, in Siegfried Schott, Urkunden mythologischen Inhalts (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929), 13–

15.

36. Amduat, fifth hour, introduction, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:76.

37. Schott, “Zum Weltbild der Jenseitsführer,” 197; Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:195.

38. Alexandre Piankoff, Le Livre du Jour et de la Nuit (Cairo: IFAO, 1942), 33–34.

39. Goyon, “Cérémonial pour faire sortir Sokaris,” 69.

40. Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:23–24.

41. Amduat, second hour, middle register, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:30; 2:49.

42. Amduat, second hour, upper register, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:25; 2:45.

43. BD 102, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 43–44.

44. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 8–9.

45. P. Sȩkowski 3/9–4/3, in Albertyna Szczudłowska,

“Pyramid Texts Preserved on Sȩkowski Papyrus,” ZÄS

99 (1972): 26–27.

46. Carl Hentze, Mythes et symboles lunaires: Chine ancienne, civilisations anciennes de l’Asie, peuples limitrophes du Pacifique (Anvers: Sikkel, 1932), esp.

59, 83, 155–59, 163–64, 183, 189–90, 201.

47. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 27–28.

48. Amduat, tenth hour, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 2:169.

49. Piankoff, Livre du Jour et de la Nuit, 17–19.

50. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 9.

51. Piankoff, Livre du Jour et de la Nuit, 31.

52. BD 100, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 29–31.

53. Goyon, “Cérémonial pour faire sortir Sokaris,” 69.

54. Goyon, “Cérémonial pour faire sortir Sokaris,” 65.

55. Goyon, “Cérémonial pour faire sortir Sokaris,” 89.

56. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 56, 63–69, 75–81.

57. Ludwig Borchardt, “Schiffahrt auf dem Lande,” ASAE

39 (1939): 377–80.

58. Siegfried Schott, Die Schrift der verborgenen Kammer in Königsgräbern der 18. Dynastie (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1958), 359.

59. Karl H. Dittmann, “Der Segelwagen von Medînet Mâdi,” MDAIK 10 (1941): 78.

60. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 69–70.

61. Schott, Schrift der verborgenen Kammer, 358.

62. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 8–10.

63. Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 22.

64. Bentresh Stela lines 16–17, and scene, in Emmanuel de Rougé, “Étude sur une stèle égyptienne appartenant à la Bibliothèque Impériale,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed.

Gaston Maspero, BE 23 (Paris: Leroux, 1910), 3:248–49, text opposite 244.

65. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 43.

66. Fernand Bisson de la Roque, “Le lac sacré de Tôd,”

CdE 12 (1937): 157–62.

67. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 22.

68. Piankoff, Livre du Jour et de la Nuit, 17.

69. De Rougé, “Étude sur une stèle égyptienne,” 247–49.

70. Morenz, Ägyptische Religion, 22.

71. Theodor Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris (Prague: Orientalisches Institut, 1940–41), 2:85.

72. Erik Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971), 58; English trans., Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many, trans. John Baines (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1982), 68.

73. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 61–64; English trans., 70–73; and Erik Hornung, review of The Origins of Osiris, by J. Gwyn Griffiths, OLZ 65 (1970): 18.

74. Georges Posener, “Une réinterprétation tardive du nom du dieu Khonsou,” ZÄS 93 (1966): 119.

75. Eberhard Otto, Gott und Mensch nach den ägyptischen Tempelinschriften der griechisch-römischen Zeit: Eine Untersuchungen zur

Phraseologie der Tempelinschriften (Heidelberg: Winter, 1964), 53.

76. Pierre Montet, “Chonsou et son serviteur,” Kêmi 12

(1952): 66–67.

77. Aylward M. Blackman, “The Pharaoh’s Placenta and the Moon-God Khons,” JEA 3 (1916): 246.

78. Blackman, “Pharaoh’s Placenta and the Moon-God Khons,” 238.

79. Blackman, “Pharaoh’s Placenta and the Moon-God Khons,” 246.

80. Posener, “Réinterprétation tardive du nom du dieu Khonsou,” 115.

81. Posener, “Réinterprétation tardive du nom du dieu Khonsou,” 118.

82. Hopfner, Plutarch über Isis und Osiris, 1:97.

83. Jan Bergman, Ich bin Isis: Studien zum memphitischen Hintergrund der griechischen Isisaretalogien

(Uppsala: Berlingska, 1968), 184, 189.

84. Georges Legrain, Les temples de Karnak (Brussels: Vromant, 1929), 217 fig. 129.

85. University of Chicago Oriental Institute Epigraphic Survey, The Temple Proper, Medinet Habu 5 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957), pl. 257 nos. C and

D.

86. Siegfried Herrmann, “Steuerruder, Waage, Herz und Zunge in ägyptischen Bildreden,” ZÄS 79 (1954): 106–

15.

87. Jan Zandee, Death as an Enemy: According to Ancient Egyptian Conceptions, trans. Mrs. W. F.

Klasens (Leiden: Brill, 1960), 213.

88. Paul Barguet, “L’origine et la signification du contrepoids de collier-menat,” BIFAO 52 (1953): 110.

89. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 213.

90. Blackman, “Pharaoh’s Placenta and the Moon-God Khons,” 247.

91. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 96 n. 3.

92. Pierre Gilbert, “Autour du pylône de Khonsou,” CdE 23

(1948): 17–21.

93. Helck, Die Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 96.

94. Alexandre Piankoff, Le “coeur” dans les textes égyptiens depuis l’Ancien jusqu’à la fin du Nouvel Empire (Paris: Geuthner, 1930), 54.

95. Adriaan de Buck, “Un chapitre de psychologie égyptienne,” CdE 21 (1946): 17–24.

96. Samuel Birch, “On Formulas Relating to the Heart,” ZÄS

8 (1870): 30–34, 46–48, 73–81; Wilhelm Spiegelberg,

“Das Herz als zweites Wesen des Menschen,” ZÄS 66

(1931): 35–37.

97. Wb 3:272.

98. Spiegelberg, “Herz als zweites Wesen des Menschen,”

36–37.

99. BD 27, 29.

100. BD 27, in E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Dead: The Papyrus of Ani, Scribe and Treasurer of the Temples of Egypt, About B.C. 1450 (New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1913), 2:452; 3: pl. 15.

101. P. Louvre N. 3279 lines 21–24, in Goyon, Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279, 39–41.

102. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd rev. ed.

(Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1957), 465, sign-list F35.

103. Bruno H. Stricker, De Geboorte van Horus (Leiden: Brill, l963–68), 1:29 fig. 4.

104. Piankoff, “Coeur” dans les textes égyptiens, 8–9.

105. Parker, “Joseph Smith Egyptian Papyri.” 98.

106. Baer, “Breathing Permit of Hôr,” 119, emphasis in original.

107. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 22–23; English trans., 35–36.

108. Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen, 23; English trans., 36.

109. Siegfried Morenz, “Das Problem des Werdens zu Osiris in der griechisch-römischen Zeit Ägyptens,” in REHR, 82–83.

110. Günther Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten (Jena: Diederichs, 1915), 300, from Cairo and Louvre papyri.

111. Abd el-Mohsen Bakir, “The Cairo Calendar of Lucky and Unlucky Days,” ASAE 48 (1948): 428.

112. P. Setna I 4/19–21, in Francis Ll. Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis: The Sethon of Herodotus and the Demotic Tales of Khamuas (Oxford:

Clarendon, 1900), 28, 112–15, quotation on 28.

113. P. Setna I 4/23–25, in Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis, 28–29, 114–17.

114. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 55–60, 75–81; Morenz,

“Problem des Werdens zu Osiris,” 89–90.

115. Gaballa and Kitchen, “Festival of Sokar,” 42.

116. Philippe Derchain, Rites égyptiens I: Le sacrifice de l’oryx (Brussels: FERE, 1962), 30–36.

117. J. Smolian, “Vehicula religiosa: Wagen in mythos, ritus, kultus und mysterium,” Numen 10 (1963): 225.

118. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride (Of Isis and Osiris) 16.

119. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals, 120.

120. Alexandre Moret, Mystères égyptiens (Paris: Colin, 1913), 72–102.

121. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 188–90, 189 nn. 3–4.

122. E.g., P. Salt 825 14/6–7, in Philippe Derchain, Le Papyrus Salt 825 (B.M. 10051): Rituel pour la

conservation de la vie en Égypte (Brussels: Palais des Académies, 1965), 2:15*.

123. De Rougé, “Étude sur une stèle égyptienne,” 248.

124. S. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne: Compléments à la religion égyptienne (Athens: BAOA, 1957), 404–5, quotation on 404.

125. Siegfried Schott, Die Reinigung Pharaos in einem memphitischen Tempel (Berlin P 13242) (Göttingen:

Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1957), 70.

126. Hans O. Lange and Otto Neugebauer, Papyrus Carlsberg No. I: Ein hieratisch-demotischer

kosmologischer Text (Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1940), 25.

127. Paul Barguet, Le Livre des Morts des anciens égyptiens (Paris: Cerf, 1967), 22, discussing BD 81.

128. George Nagel, “Un papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire (Louvre 3292 [inv.]),” BIFAO 29 (1929): 103–5.

129. Jan Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,” ZÄS 99 (1972): 51–52.

130. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 370–

410.

131. Siegfried Schott, “Nut spricht als Mutter und Sarg,”

RdE 17 (1965): 81–87.

132. Schott, “Nut spricht als Mutter und Sarg,” 81.

133. Short Amduat, eighth hour, lines 195–99, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 3:17–18.

134. CT 170, in Adriaan de Buck, The Egyptian Coffin Texts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935–61), 3:40–41.

135. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 115, 111.

136. Alan H. Gardiner, The Temple of King Sethos I at Abydos (London and Chicago: Egyptian Exploration Society and University of Chicago Press, 1933–59), 1:19–20, 24; 2:7, 15–16.

137. Paul Barguet, “La structure du temple Ipet-Sout

d’Amon à Karnak du Moyen Empire à Aménophis II,”

BIFAO 52 (1953): opposite 150.

138. Spiegel, Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 97.

139. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire de l’anté-diluvien à Sumer-Babylone: La familiarité divine originelle (Athens: BAOA, 1961), 447; Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 424.

140. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 428; cf. Barguet, “La structure du temple,”

150.

141. Winfried Barta, review of Canopics, by George Andrew Reisner, OLZ 66 (1971): 138.

142. Eberhard Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1960), 2:33; cf. PT 25–42

§§17–32.

143. Spiegel, Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 150; for illustration, see 85.

144. Hans Bonnet, Reallexikon der ägyptischen Religionsgeschichte, 2nd ed. (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971), 278; Hermann Junker, Die Onurislegende (Vienna: Hölder, 1917), 116–17.

145. Hermann Junker, Der Auszug der Hathor-Tefnut aus Nubien (Berlin: Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1911), 38.

146. Junker, Onurislegende, 118.

147. Hermann Junker, Die Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien nach den Inschriften von Dendera,

Edfu und Philae (Vienna: Hölder, 1910), 122.

148. On the embrace of Nut, see above, commentary to line 3, pp. 119–21.

149. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 99–

100.

150. Schott, “Nut spricht als Mutter und Sarg,” 86.

151. Adolf Rusch, Die Entwicklung der Himmelsgöttin Nut zu einer Totengottheit (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1922), 61–62.

152. See above, commentary to line 3, pp. 119–21.

153. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 74–

75.

154. Junker, Stundenwachen in den Osirismysterien, 99.

155. Legrain, Temples de Karnak, 239, 242 fig. 148.

156. See Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,”

410.

157. Barta, review of Canopics, by Reisner, 138.

158. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of Opening the Mouth (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1909), 1:215.

159. CT 146, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:180–82.

160. CT 146, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:183.

161. CT 141, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:174.

162. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire, 97.

163. BD 192, in Barguet, Livre des Morts, 276.

164. Spiegel, Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 99.

165. Miroslav Verner, “Statue of Twēret (Cairo Museum no.

39145) Dedicated by Pabēsi and Several Remarks on

the Role of the Hippopotamus Goddess,” ZÄS 96 (1969): 57.

166. PT 215 §140; see also Raymond O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969), 42.

167. Spiegel, Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 56, 80–81, 97, 99.

168. Rudolf Anthes, “Atum, Nefertem und die Kosmogonien von Heliopolis: Ein Versuch,” ZÄS 82 (1958): 4.

169. Spiegel, Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 178–80, 184–85.

170. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 361, 385; see PT 225 §222; 251 §§269–71; Spiegel,

Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 215–17.

171. PT 222 §§212–13, in Faulkner, Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 50–51; see Spiegel,

Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, 178–80, 184–85.

172. Maxence de Rochemonteix, “Le temple d’Apet, où est engendré l’Osiris de Thèbes,” RT 3 (1881): 83; enlarged and reprinted as “Le temple d’Apet, où est engendré l’Osiris thébain,” in Oeuvres diverses, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 3 (Paris: Leroux, 1894): 192; Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:208.

173. CT 103, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:110.

174. Alexandre Moret, Le rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 64.

175. Mystery Play of the Succession, in Henri Frankfort,

Kingship and the Gods: A Study of Ancient Near Eastern Religion as the Integration of Society and Nature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948), 136.

176. Gustave Lefebvre, Le tombeau de Petosiris (Cairo: IFAO, 1923–24), 95; cf. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:73.

177. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:171–74.

178. Svein Bjerke, “Remarks on the Egyptian Ritual of

‘Opening the Mouth’ and Its Interpretation,” Numen 12

(1965): 215.

179. Hermann Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” RT 36 (1914): 13.

180. Eberhard Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue seit dem neuen Reich,” Or 17 (1948): 460.

181. Gospel of Truth, I, 41, 33 through 42, 1.

182. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 94 n. 5.

183. Alexandre Moret, “Varia: Sur le rite de l’embrassement,” Sphinx 11 (1908): 26–27.

184. Wb 3:469; Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 94 n. 5.

185. Moret, “Varia: Sur le rite de l’embrassement,” 28–29.

186. Alan H. Gardiner, “The Coronation of King Ḥaremḥab,” JEA 39 (1953): 15.

187. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 119 n. 2; Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 46, 135.

188. Rusch, “Osirisritual in den Pyramidentexten,” 32–33.

189. Henri Frankfort, “Pyramid Temples and the Religion of the Old Kingdom,” BiOr 10 (1953): 160.

190. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:65–66

(scene 14).

191. PT 485B §1033; 535 §1280; 579 §1539; and 659

§§1860–61, in Otto, Das ägyptische

Mundöffnungsritual, 2:65.

192. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:65–66

(scene 14).

193. Shabako stone, line 64, in Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zur altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Das

“Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der

Schabakostein des Britischen Museums (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928) , 76, and in James H. Breasted, “The Philosophy of a Memphite Priest,” ZÄS 39 (1901): picture between 52 and 53.

194. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:169

(scene 74B).

195. Bjerke, “Remarks on the Egyptian Ritual of ‘Opening the Mouth,’” 215.

196. PT 222 §§212a–213b; Kurt Sethe, Übersetzung und Kommentar zu den altägyptischen Pyramidentexten (1935–39; reprint, Hamburg: Augustin, 1962), 1:54, 161–

62.

197. Rusch, “Osirisritual in den Pyramidentexten,” 29–34.

198. Alan W. Shorter, “Reliefs Showing the Coronation of Ramesses II,” JEA 20 (1934): 18.

199. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 101.

200. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 123–39.

201. Alexandre Moret, Du caractère religieux de la

royauté pharaonique (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 100–102, quotation on 101; Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 100–101 n. 4.

202. Moret, Du caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 218–21, quotation on 221.

203. Otto, Das ägyptische Mundöffnungsritual, 2:169.

204. CT 80, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:40–41.

205. Spiegel, “Auferstehungsritual der Unaspyramide,” 392.

206. Hermann Grapow, Das 17. Kapitel des ägyptischen Totenbuches und seine religionsgeschichtliche

Bedeutung (Berlin: Paul, 1912), 13–14.

207. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 134.

208. Grapow, Das 17. Kapitel des ägyptischen Totenbuches, 14.

209. CT 76, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:1–2.

210. Mark Lidzbarski, Ginzā: Der Schatz oder das grosse Buch der Mandäer (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1925), 559.

211. Constant de Wit, “Inscriptions dédicatoires du temple d’Edfou,” CdE 36 (1961): 80–81.

212. Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue,”

450.

213. Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue,”

459; Hermann Ranke, “Ein spätsaïtische Statue in

Philadelphia,” MDAIK 12 (1943): 111–12.

214. PT 600 §§1652–53, in Faulkner, Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 246; cf. Zandee, “Sargtexte, Spruch 75,”

51–52.

215. Gustave Lefebvre, “Textes du tombeau de Petosiris,”

ASAE 20 (1920): 217.

216. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:215.

217. Bjerke, “Remarks on the Egyptian Ritual of ‘Opening the Mouth,’” 215.

218. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:102–4.

219. Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue,”

452.

220. PT 25 §18, in Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue,” 450.

221. P. Louvre N. 3292, in Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 81–84. [In his article, Nagel claims that this last door is no different than the other doors even though it is depicted differently in the papyrus. Nibley seems correct here—eds.]

222. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

81.

223. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

81–84.

224. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 99–100.

225. Gardiner, “Coronation of King Ḥaremḥab,” 15.

226. Alan H. Gardiner, “Inscriptions from the Tomb of Si-renpowet I, Prince of Elephantine,” ZÄS 45 (1908): 127

and n. 2.

227. André Pelletier, “Le grand rideau du vestibule du temple de Jérusalem,” Syria 35 (1958): 218–26.

228. François Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à

Dendara,” ASAE 51 (1951): 385–87, 393.

229. CT 60, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:253.

230. Jacques J. Clère, “Un passage de la stèle du général Antef,” BIFAO 30 (1931): 441–42.

231. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 140–41.

232. Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” 381; Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 47, 49.

233. Wb 5:231.

234. Wb 5:232.

235. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

46–47, 49.

236. Geo Widengren, The Gnostic Attitude, trans. Birger A.

Pearson (Santa Barbara, Calif.: Institute of Religious Studies, 1973), 20–24.

237. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 188–89.

238. Alexandre Piankoff, “Le Livre des Quererts,” BIFAO

42 (1944): pl. LXXIII.I.

239. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” pl. LXXIV.II.

240. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” 61.

241. See Bernhard Grdseloff, “Nouvelles données concernant la tente de purification,” ASAE 51 (1951): 129–40.

242. Wb 3:231–32.

243. CT 44, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:188.

244. Alexandre Piankoff, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon (New York: Pantheon, 1955), 2:125–26, pl. 50.

245. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 52.

246. Wolfgang Helck, “Die Herkunft des abydenischen Osirisrituals,” ArOr 20 (1952): 80; Grdseloff, “Nouvelles données concernant la tente de purification,” 134, 138–

39; Émile Massoulard, Préhistoire et protohistoire d’Égypte (Paris: Institut d’Ethnologie, 1949), 446.

247. Seton Lloyd, “The First Light on the Bronze Age Religion of Western Anatolia: Horned Altar Shrines from Fifteen Hundred Years of Beycesultan’s History,”

Illustrated London News, 25 January 1958, 146 and fig.

1.

248. Herbert G. May, “The Ark—A Miniature Temple,”

American Journal of Semitic Languages and

Literatures 52 (1936): 234.

249. Theophylactus, Expositio in epistolam ad Hebraeos (Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews) 9.2–3, in PG 125:297.

250. Pelletier, “Grand rideau du vestibule du temple de Jérusalem,” 222; cf. TB Ketubbot 106a (XIII, 1), in Lazarus Goldschmidt, Der babylonische Talmud (The Hague: Nijoff, 1933–35), 4:811.

251. Pelletier, “Grand rideau du vestibule du temple de Jérusalem,” 223, 225–26, quotations on latter two pages.

252. TB Ketubbot 106a (XIII, 1), in Goldschmidt, Der babylonsiche Talmud, 4:811.

253. Julius Wellhausen, Reste arabischen Heidentums: Gesammelt und Erläutert (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1961),

134–35.

254. Robert Eisler, Iēsous basileus ou basileusas (Heidelberg: Winter, 1929–30), 1:459.

255. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

84.

256. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 220.

257. CT 142, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:175.

258. Zohar , Vayera 115a, in Harry Sperling and Maurice Simon, The Zohar, 2nd ed. (London: Soncino, 1984), 1:361.

259. CT 44, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:188.

260. Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zur altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Der dramatische

Ramesseumpapyrus: Ein Spiel zur Thronbesteigung des Königs (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928), 219.

261. Ramesseum Dramatic Papyrus 108–11, in Sethe, Der dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus, pl. 21.

262. Sethe, Der dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus, 219.

263. Zohar, Jethro 76a, in Harry Sperling, Maurice Simon, and Paul P. Levertoff, The Zohar, 2nd ed. (London: Soncino, 1984), 3:230.

264. Testament of Levi 10; cf. OTP 1:792 and n. 10b.

265. Marc Philonenko, Les interpolations chrétiennes des testaments des douze patriarches et les manuscripts de Qumrân (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1960), 18.

266. Marinus de Jonge, The Testaments of the Twelve

Patriarchs: A Study of Their Text, Composition and Origin (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1953), cited in Philonenko, Testaments des douze patriarches, 18 n. 6.

267. Testament of Levi 10.

268. Untitled Text in the Bruce Codex, 34, in Gnostische Schriften in koptischer Sprache aus dem Codex

Brucianus, ed. Carl Schmidt (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1892), 251.

269. On the Origin of the World 98, 20–23.

270. On the Origin of the World 98, 21–23.

271. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 151; cf. the epopteia of the Greek mysteries.

272. Daumas, “Sur trois représentations de Nout à Dendara,” 373–400; Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,” 84.

273. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:208–9.

274. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 13.

275. Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue,”

461–62, quotation on 462.

276. Kees, “‘Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝ.t,’” 5–6, quotation on 6.

277. Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue,”

450; Rudolf Anthes, “Der Berliner Hocker des

Petamenophis,” ZÄS 73 (1937): 26–27.

278. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:185–86.

279. See Hugh Nibley, “Victoriosa Loquacitas,” reprinted in The Ancient State: The Rulers and the Ruled, CWHN

10:262 fig. 17.

280. Henri Leclerq, “Main,” in Dictionnaire d’archéologie

chrétienne et de liturgie, ed. Fernand Cabrol and Henri Leclercq (Paris: Letouzey et Ané, 1907–53), 10:1207.

281. BD 80.

282. Max Guilmot, “La signification des métamorphoses du défunt en Égypte ancienne,” RHR 175 (1969): 13–14, sees in this a natural human impulse and quotes André Malraux: “Every man dreams of being God.”

283. Cited in Marguérite Harl, “From Glory to Glory,” in Kyriakon: Festschrift Johannes Quasten, ed. Patrick Granfield and Josef A. Jungmann (Münster:

Aschendorff, 1970), 2:730–35, citation on 730.

284. Helck, Die Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 1:78.

285. Heraclitus, in Hermann Diels and Walther Kranz, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker (Berlin: Weidmann, 1951), 1:164.

286. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 77.

287. For sources, see Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 404–5, 425.

288. Plutarch, Of Isis and Osiris 77.

289. Hippolytus, Refutatio Omnium Haeresium (Refutation of All Heresies) 4.43, in Theodor Hopfner, Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae (Bonn: Marcus and Weber, 1922), 433.

290. Pistis Sophia 1.29–30, in Carl Schmidt, ed., Pistis Sophia, trans. Violet MacDermot (Leiden: Brill, 1978), 41–45.

291. Apocryphon of John BG 57:7–60:19 = II 22:6–23:26 =

III 28:13–30:17 = IV 34:15–36:21.

292. Apocryphon of John BG 23:3–21 = II 2:33–3:12 = IV

4:3–21.

293. Testament of Benjamin 9:3–5, in APOT, 2:358–59; OTP, 1:827 and n. 9c.

294. 2 Jeu chap. 50, p. 73, in Gnostische Schriften, ed.

Schmidt, 122.

295. 1 Jeu chaps. 37–38, pp. 41–43, in Gnostische Schriften, ed. Schmidt, 86–87.

296. Gospel of Thomas II, 47, 19–24 (logion 83).

297. Michael Asin and Palaccios, Logia et agrapha Domini Jesu, in PO 19:580, logion #187.

298. Gerardus van der Leeuw, “The SUMBOLA [ Symbola]

in Firmicus Maternus,” Egyptian Religion 1/2 (1933): 72.

299. Gospel of Philip II, 85, 1–15.

300. Hugh W. Nibley, “Christian Envy of the Temple,” JQR, n.s., 50 (1959–60): 231–32, reprinted in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:409.

301. Gospel of Bartholomew X , in Andre Wilmart and Eugène Tisserant, “Fragments Grecs et Latins de

l’Évangèle de Barthélemy,” Revue Biblique 10 (1913): 363.

302. 1 Jeu, chaps. 38, 52, pp. 42–43, 83, in Gnostische Schriften, ed. Schmidt, 86–88, 133–34.

303. For example, Pistis Sophia 2.98–99, 109, in Schmidt, Pistis Sophia, 242–46, 277–78.

304. Gospel of Philip II, 85, 1–15.

305. Kephalaia 38 (ch. 9) lines 5–9, in Kephalaia: 1.

Hälfte (Lieferung 1–10), ed. Hans J. Polotsky (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1940), 38.

306. Kephalaia 38 (ch. 9) lines 9–19; 40 lines 19–22, in Kephalaia, 38, 40.

307. Kephalaia 40 (ch. 9) lines 19–22, in Kephalaia, 40.

308. Kephalaia 38 (ch. 9) line 13 through 39 line 9, in Kephalaia, 38–39.

309. See, for example, Ethel S. Drower, The Mandaeans of Iraq and Iran: Their Cults, Customs, Magic,

Legends, and Folklore (Leiden: Brill, 1962), xviii–xix.

310. Rusch, “Osirisritual in den Pyramidentexten,” 39.

311. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 23, 64, quotation on 23.

312. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 80–81, 101–2, 160–62; Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 32, 66–67, 133–36.

313. Moret, “Varia: Sur le rite de l’embrassement,” 29–30.

314. Moret, “Varia: Sur le rite de l’embrassement,” 31.

315. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

86.

316. In Eugène Lefébure, Les hypogées royaux de Thèbes (Paris: Leroux, 1886), pt. 2 pl. IX; pt. 4, pl. 50.

317. Mayassis, Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et protohistoire, 49–50.

318. Svend A. Pallis, The Babylonian Akîtu Festival (Copenhagen: Høst, 1926), 178, cited in Mayassis,

Mystères et initiations dans la préhistoire et

protohistoire, 50.

319. Amduat, seventh hour, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:119; 2:126–27.

320. Moret, “Varia: Sur le rite de l’embrassement,” 28; Georges Legrain, “Second rapport sur les travaux

exécutés à Karnak du 31 octobre 1901 au 15 mai 1902,”

ASAE 4 (1903): 13.

321. Legrain, “Second rapport sur les travaux exécutés à Karnak,” 13.

322. Moret, “Varia: Sur le rite de l’embrassement,” 27–28.

323. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” pl. LXXI.

324. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” 59–60; cf. Wb 5:560–

62.

325. Raymond O. Faulkner, A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian (Oxford: Griffith Institute, 1962), 321.

326. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:374; 3: pl. 4.

327. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 221.

328. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 3: pl. 4.

329. Shorter, “Reliefs Showing the Coronation of Ramesses II,” 18.

330. Shorter, “Reliefs Showing the Coronation of Ramesses II,” pl. III.3.

331. Nagel, “Papyrus funéraire de la fin du Nouvel Empire,”

81.

332. Hermann Kees, Göttinger Totenbuchstudien (Totenbuch Kapitel 69 und 70) (Berlin: Akademie-

Verlag, 1954), 19, 23.

333. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 138–40.

334. BD 125, in de Buck, Readingbook, 121; Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische

Totenbuch, 38 n. 9, also see a resemblance to yoga.

335. BD 125, in Thausing and Kerszt-Kratschmann, Das grosse ägyptische Totenbuch, 38.

336. Alexandre Moret, Kings and Gods of Egypt (New York: Putnam, 1912), 23 n. 2.

337. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 23, 64, quotation on 23.

338. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 47; see Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 99–101.

339. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:73.

340. Budge, Book of Opening the Mouth, 1:172–73.

341. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 45–48.

342. Moret, “Varia: Sur le rite de l’embrassement,” 29.

343. See Friedrich Preisigke, Vom göttlichen Fluidum nach ägyptischer Anschauung (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1920), 50.

344. Preisigke, Vom göttlichen Fluidum, 5–10, 39–41, 52–

56.

345. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:89.

346. Thausing, Sein und Werden, 223.

347. Cited in Otto, “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen Tempelstatue,” 451, 449; Anthes, “Der Berliner Hocker

des Petamenophis,” 26–27, quotation on 27 and n. 1.

348. Anthes, “Berliner Hocker des Petamenophis,” 25–26.

349. Rusch, “Osirisritual in den Pyramidentexten,” 29–32; see PT 364 §§610d–611d, 613a–614a; 357 §§584c–

585d; 368 §636a–d; 357 §592b or 371 §650c; 364 §621b or 371 §648c; 664b §1887.

350. Van der Leeuw, “Symbola in Firmicus Maternus,” 71.

351. Gaston Maspero, “Sur la stèle de l’intronisation trouvée au Djebel-Barkal,” in Études de mythologie et

d’archéologie égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero, BE 7

(Paris: Leroux, 1898), 3:150.

352. Amduat, seventh hour, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:119.

353. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” 59–60.

354. CT 38, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 1:157.

355. Budge, Book of the Dead: Papyrus of Ani, 2:520; 3: pl. 24.

356. BD 124:9–11, in Richard Lepsius, Das Todtenbuch der Ägypter nach dem hieroglyphischen Papyrus in Turin (Leipzig: Wigand, 1842), pl. XLVI.

357. Van der Leeuw, “Symbola in Firmicus Maternus,” 70–

71.

358. Eberhard Otto, “Sprüche auf altägyptischen Särgen,”

ZDMG 102 (1952): 192.

359. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:9.

360. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” 60 and pl. LXXI.

361. Wb 1:37, 44–45; Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” pl.

LXXI.

362. Piankoff, “Livre des Quererts,” 60 and pl. LXXI.

363. Gospel of Philip II, 84, 23–27; Eisler, Iēsous Basileus ou basileusas, 1:459.

364. Wilfred G. Lambert, “New Light on the Babylonian Flood,” Journal of Semitic Studies 5 (1960): 119.

365. Hermann V. Hilprecht, The Earliest Version of the Babylonian Deluge Story and the Temple Library of Nippur (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 1910), 45–46.

366. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 134.

367. TB Ḥagigah 16a, in Goldschmidt, Der babylonische Talmud, 3:839.

368. TB Ḥagigah 15a, in Goldschmidt, Der babylonische Talmud, 3:835.

369. Heliodorus, Aethiopica 2.35.4.

370. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 41; Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 23.

371. Wb 3:71.

372. Legrain, “Second rapport sur les travaux exécutés à Karnak,” 13.

373. [We were unable to locate the source for this quotation; the writings of Ramses III are voluminous and not

completely published. The quotation appears to be a typical formulaic Egyptian expression. We have no

reason to doubt its authenticity—eds.]

374. Jéquier, “À propos d’une stèle éthiopienne,” 170.

375. Legrain, “Second rapport sur les travaux exécutés à Karnak,” 13; cf. the same blessings in PT 442 §§819–

22, in which the dead king becomes a star.

376. Amduat, seventh hour, in Hornung, Das Amduat, 1:119–22.

377. Hellmut Brunner, review of Untersuchungen zu den ägyptischen Tempelreliefs der griechisch-römischen Zeit, by Erich Winter, AfO 23 (1970): 119–20.

378. Helck, Die Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II., 26 (discussion of picture 22); in the preceding scene that god gives “all life and all health”

and “(the ki)ngship of Re”; ibid., 25 (discussion of picture 21).

379. Martinus Stolk, Ptah: Ein Beitrag zur Religionsgeschichte des alten Ägyptens (Berlin: Paul, 1911), 52–53.

380. Sethe, Übersetzung und Kommentar zu den altägyptischen Pyramidentexten, 1:162.

381. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 44–45, cited in Mayassis, Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte ancienne, 362.

382. Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte, 101; Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté

pharaonique, 160–61.

383. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 45.

384. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 41–42.

385. Heinrich Schäfer, “Djed-Pfeiler, Lebenszeichen, Osiris, Isis,” in Studies presented to F. Ll. Griffith, ed.

S. R. K. Glanville (London: Egypt Exploration Society and Oxford University Press, 1932), 426–27.

386. Heinrich Schäfer, “Das sogenannte ‘Blut der Isis’ und das Zeichen ‘Leben,’” ZÄS 62 (1927): 108–10.

387. Alfred Wiedemann, Das alte Ägypten (Heidelberg: Winter, 1920), 72–73.

388. Wiedemann, Das alte Ägypten, 72–73; Stricker, Geboorte van Horus, 2:89 fig. 15, 123; Moret, Mystères égyptiens, 80–87.

389. Wiedemann, Das alte Ägypten, 78–79.

390. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 196 n. 3.

391. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 150–51.

392. Schäfer, “Das sogenannte ‘Blut der Isis’” 108–10.

393. Schäfer, “Djed-Pfeiler, Lebenszeichen, Osiris, Isis,”

424.

394. Schäfer, “Djed-Pfeiler, Lebenszeichen, Osiris, Isis,”

425.

395. Schäfer, “Djed-Pfeiler, Lebenszeichen, Osiris, Isis,”

430.

396. Schäfer, “Das sogenannte ‘Blut der Isis’” 109.

397. Schäfer, “Das sogenannte ‘Blut der Isis’” 110.

398. Bonnet, Reallexikon, 150–51 and fig. 45.

399. PT 357 §§585, 589.

400. Schäfer, “Djed-Pfeiler, Lebenszeichen, Osiris, Isis,”

426.

401. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 559; Faulkner, Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, 54.

402. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 143 n. 2.

403. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 559.

404. Brunner, review of Untersuchungen zu den ägyptischen Tempelreliefs, 119–20.

405. Brunner, review of Untersuchungen zu den ägyptischen Tempelreliefs, 119, quoting Winter.

406. Alan H. Gardiner, “The Baptism of Pharaoh,” JEA 36

(1950): 12.

407. Moret, Caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique, 42–43.

408. Bergman, Ich bin Isis, 143 n. 2.

409. Schäfer, “Djed-Pfeiler, Lebenszeichen, Osiris, Isis,”

429.

410. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, 134–35.

411. Van der Leeuw, “Symbola in Firmicus Maternus,” 65–

72.

412. Van der Leeuw, “Symbola in Firmicus Maternus,” 67.

413. Van der Leeuw, “Symbola in Firmicus Maternus,” 69–

70.

414. Van der Leeuw, “Symbola in Firmicus Maternus,” 71.

415. Van der Leeuw, “Symbola in Firmicus Maternus,” 65.

416. Van der Leeuw, “Symbola in Firmicus Maternus,” 71.

Introduction to the Appendixes

As in a hall of mirrors, the Book of

Breathings seems to be reflected in an

endless procession of documents that fade

out of sight in either direction. Extending

behind it into the past lie the Egyptian

funerary and temple texts that go back to the

beginning, and after it comes an equally

impressive succession of early Christian and

Jewish writings that move on down through

the patristic literature to our own day. The

half dozen pieces that follow are to balance

the picture and should help the Latter-day

Saint reader to feel at home, if not to orient

himself, in the strange world the Prophet

Joseph opened up to the view of a scornful

and incredulous humanity.

Appendix 1

From the Dead Sea Scrolls (1QS)

Description of the Rule of the

Community

The Rule of the Community (1QS), from

the Dead Sea Scrolls, sets forth the beliefs

and activities of a community of pious

sectaries at Qumran in the desert just before

the Christian era—what Professor Frank

Cross has called a sect (church) of

“anticipation.” 1 Everything is by way of preparation “for the eternal planting of a

holy temple for Israel, and the mysteries

(secret ordinances) of a holy of holies for

Aaron” (1QS VIII, 5–6). Preparation is the

theme; hence, it is not surprising that the

specific ordinances referred to are the

initiatory rites. But at the same time the scroll makes clear the ultimate objective of

its whole operation—exaltation and eternal

lives for the members—while plainly

indicating the general nature of the temple

activities to which it looks forward with

such eager anticipation.

The whole theme of religion is eternal life.

But beings who would live forever must be

prepared to do so—they must be perfect.

Nothing but perfection will do for an order

of existence that is to last forever and ever.

The striving for perfection is the theme of the

Rule of the Community. The sectaries of

Qumran knew that the greatest of all prizes

was not to be cheaply bought, that there

could be no cheating or cutting of corners; to

prepare for eternity, one must be willing to

go all the way. Whatever may have been

their human failings, these people, as the

Roman Catholic scholar Georg Molin

observed, must be taken seriously and viewed with great respect. The proper title

for them, the name they gave themselves, he

maintains, is “Latter-day Saints” —and he

deplores the preemption of that name at the

present time by a “so-called Christian sect.”

2 A careful reading of the Rule of the Community will show that it has a great deal in common with the Book of Breathings.

Roman numerals indicate columns in the

original text; numbers following indicate the

lines. Passages in brackets are my

summaries or paraphrases. Following is a

translation from Eduard Lohse’s German

text. 3 Not all lines are included in each section.

Return to the Ancient Order

The whole first section of the text (I, 1–9)

closely resembles the first section of the

Doctrine and Covenants and also the

prologue to the New Testament in Luke 1.

Thus, in Luke 1:6: “And they were both

righteous before God, walking in all the

commandments and ordinances of the Lord

blameless,” the expressions “righteous

before God,” “walking in all the

commandments,” and “blameless (perfect) in

all,” as well as the pleonasm

“commandments and ordinances,” though all

quite un-Greek, are strictly in the idiom of

the Qumran sectaries, among whom (or

among whose neighbors) the parents of John

the Baptist may very well have mingled.

I, 2. [to] do what is good and proper

(upright) in his [God’s] sight (before him)

even as

3. he has commanded by the hand of Moses

and by the hand of all his servants the

prophets …

6. and never to walk again (any more) in the

ways of a guilty heart and lustful eyes.

7. To love all who take upon themselves to keep the laws of God

8. by covenant in righteousness ( or in the covenant of grace); to enter into ( lit. be made one with) the deliberations ( lit.

counsel; Eduard Lohse translates this as

Ratsversammlung)4 of God; and to walk before him perfect (in) all

9. that has been revealed regarding the

performance [in proper time and place] of

their appointed duties ( or ordinances).

Complete Commitment Required

Here (I, 9–18) and in line 8, the

candidates take on themselves by covenant

the law of God to keep all his

commandments even at the peril of their

lives. With this goes a law of consecration.

The society calls itself a yaḥad, meaning oneness or unity, thereby identifying itself

with the model church, the Zion of Enoch

(the oldest known fragments of any book of Enoch have been discovered among the

Dead Sea Scrolls), who were “of one heart

and one mind” in both spiritual and temporal things (Moses 7:18; cf. John 17:11, 21–24;

D&C 38:25–39). 5

I, 11. [All candidates] shall bring with them

all their understanding ( or education,

including both knowledge and

intelligence) and physical strength

12–13. and earthly possessions into the

church of God. [These three things are

now put on a higher level: Their minds are

purified by a true understanding of God’s

laws, their bodily strength is put to the test

and refined like pure gold in ways

prescribed by God, and their property is

administered according to his just and holy

principles.]

14. [They are to be neither impatient for

advancement ( or the fulfilling of God’s

promised times) nor apathetic to such.]

16. And all who enter into the order of the

church shall do so ( lit. go over) by

covenant before God to do

17. all which he has commanded and not to

depart ( lit. return) from his way ( lit. from after him) out of any fear or dread of the

burning

18. in the dominion of Belial.

Preliminary Meeting

At a preliminary meeting, the candidates

formally renounce the world and declare

their willingness to enter into the order (I,

18–II, 10). The first step is repentance:

I, 21. And the priests shall read the righteous

dealing of God …

22. and cause them to hear all the merciful

deeds of kindness upon Israel. And the

Levites shall read (of)

23. the iniquities of the children of Israel,

and all their guilty transgressions… .

24. The candidates shall confess after them,

saying: We have sinned,

25. […] we and our [fathers] before us

II, 10. And all entering the covenant shall say

after both the blessers and the cursers,

Amen! Amen!

With every blessing goes a cursing—a

penalty clause with every oath and covenant.

Conditions of Admission

All who have mental reservations or who

backslide or fail to live up to every covenant

will be delivered over to the power of

Satan, for God is not deceived (II, 11–18).

II, 13. [whoever] when he hears the words of

this covenant assures ( lit. blesses) himself in his heart, saying: I will have peace,

14. and in the way of mine own heart I will

walk…;

15. the wrath of God and the recompense (zeal, fulness) of his judgments shall burn

him in eternal destruction, and to him shall

cling all

16. the curses of this covenant. And God

shall set him apart for evil;

17. his portion (lot) shall be among those

who are forever accursed.

18. And all who come into the covenant shall

answer and say after them, Amen! Amen!

Going Over to the Next Phase

After the preliminary meeting, the entire

company is described as “going over” from

one state to another (II, 19–25).

II, 19. Thus shall they do year by year all the

days of the rule of Belial. The priests shall

pass over ( yaʿăvôrû, pass on or through,

proceed, “pass in review” ?)

20. first of all, in order according to their

spiritual standing one after the other, and

the Levites shall pass over after them.

21. And all the people shall pass over in

third place one after the other,

22. that each man of Israel may be

distinguished by his proper thousand,

hundred, fifty, and ten… .

24. But in the true church the entire

membership shall (must) be of proper

(good)

humility,

charity

loving

(forbearing), and fair judging (righteous in

reckoning).

The verb yaʿăvôrû, “they go over,”

appears in lines 19, 20, and 21 and must

signify more than to “enter” the society or

join the church, for up to this point and as

recently as line 18, the latter idea is

expressed by another verb. The “passing

over” is a repeated occurrence, whereas the

oaths and covenants are taken once for all,

the refrain at the swearing-in meeting being

“forever and ever.” There can be no thought

of an annual renewal of initiation rites, though such rites might have been held yearly

like the early Christian baptism, which could

take place properly only at Easter. After the

priests pass along “one by one” (line 20), all

the congregation follow, also “one by one”

(line 21). But the Amen! Amen! of the

swearing-in was taken by the entire body in

unison. In the “passing along,” emphasis is

laid on putting each in his proper place or

position, citing the example of the hosts of

ancient Israel (there could hardly have been

“thousands” at an initiation session at

Qumran); at the same time there must be no

sense of rank or superiority (line 24). All of

this suggests that we are dealing here not

with positions in the church, but the actual

progression of the company from one place

to another. Throughout 1QS everyone is

constantly referred to as “walking” and

being “on the way” or “road” ( derek). This

is the familiar imagery of the initiation. It is not too much to see in the verb ʿāvar an idea of passage from one state to another as well

as from one place to another. The peculiar

allure of the language of the Dead Sea

Scrolls is that partial effacing of boundaries

of time, place, and even personality in which

all things fuse into one, along with a sense of

constant motion and activity.

Admonition against Backsliding

Again appears the admonition that they

who do not have the proper spirit cannot be

benefited by the ordinances, the exalted

nature of which is here pointed out (II, 25–

III, 14).

III, 3. And he beholds only darkness in the

ways of light. In the eye of the perfect ones

[initiates]

4. he is not held worthy. He shall not be

cleansed by the atoning rites nor shall he

be purified by the waters of niddāh, nor sanctified by any waters

5. or streams, nor made clean by any waters

of washing. Unclean, unclean shall he be

as long as he rejects the statutes

( mishpaṭîm, ordinances, judgments)

6. of God!…For in the spirit of the true

counsel of God are the ways of a man

whose sins have all been atoned for,

7. to see clearly by light of life and by the

Holy Ghost (which leads) the church ( lit.

is for the church) in his ( or its) truth. He is cleared of ( lit. cleansed from) all

8. his transgressions, and by an upright and

humble spirit the price of his sins is paid.

And by the submission of his soul to all

the ordinances ( or laws, commandments,

ḥuqqîm) of God,

9. his flesh is purified for ( or preparatory to) being sprinkled with the waters of niddāh

and sanctified in the waters of his dōkh.

And he shall direct his steps to walk perfectly

10. in all the ways of God… .

11. Then will he be qualified (pleasing)…

for the covenant

12. of the church eternal.

The unworthy who fails to make the grade

is contrasted with the “perfect ones” tāmîm,

the equivalent of the teleioi of the Christian and Greek mysteries, a “perfect one” being

one who has learned all that is required in

any phase of initiation and passed the tests.

Niddāh can mean an impurity or the removal of impurity; it has a moral sense of payment

for sin—as water, it is a removal of

pollution (Numbers 19:21). Dōk means to

tread or stamp on, to crush or pound—i.e., to

push down on; it can also mean to extinguish

a fire and to set apart.6 Why is this peculiar word used here? Irresistibly the German sect

of Dunkers comes to mind: their terms

tunken, tauchen, and dunk all convey the idea of immersion. The Arabic root is rich in

expressions. Whenever the water rites are

mentioned, a plurality of ordinances is

evident, for the waterwork appointments

(facilities) at Qumran plainly show that there

is more than one rite of cleansing by water.

Instructions to the Guide: The

Creation Motif

Next come directions for the instructor or

leader of the group to introduce them to the

creation theme. This is the clearest

indication that 1QS is meant not only as a

book of rules and table of organization but

primarily as a guide to initiatory ordinances

(III, 13–IV, 1).

III, 13. To the instructor, for demonstrating

(making plain) and for teaching all the

Sons of Light concerning the origin

( tôlǝdôt, birth, fundamental nature, family

history) of mankind (the sons of man); 14. for (knowing) every type of their spirits

by their tokens, and of their deeds by their

history (generations).

15. From God is the knowledge of all that

exists and that will (yet) be brought into

existence. And before they existed he

prepared their whole plan,

16. and when they exist according to

schedule ( lit. their appointment) they are to carry out (fill) all their activities

according to his glorious plan without any

changes.

17. All decisions rest with him ( lit. in his hand), but he will sustain them in all their

righteous desires. For he created man to

have dominion (to rule, govern) over

18. this earth. And he appointed ( lit. placed) for him two spirits by which he should

walk until the time of his visitation ( or

judgment). They are the spirits

19. of truth and of twisting ( ʿāwēl, perversity), a fountain ( maʿyan) of light,

…and a wellspring ( māqôr) of darkness.

20. In the hand of the Prince of Lights is the

rule of all the Sons of Righteousness; upon

the ways of light they walk. But in the hand

of the Angel

21. of Darkness is the rule of Sons of

Deception ( ʿāwēl). … And by (because of, in) the Angel of Darkness

22. all the Sons of Righteousness went

astray, so that all their sins and

transgressions and guilt and the trespasses

of their ways are in his power,

23. according to the deep designs of God,

until his appointed end… .

24. And all the spirits that follow him (of his

lot or portion) attempt to overthrow (cause

to stumble) the Sons of Light, while the

God of Israel and his faithful angel (the

angel of his truth) assist all

25. the Sons of Light. It was he who created the spirits of light and darkness; and upon

them is founded the whole operation

26. […] all work, and upon their ways […]

The creation story is here summarized in a

few lines, but all the main elements are

present: first the plan laid down in heaven

before the foundations of the earth (III, 15–

16); then the creation of man (III, 17–18);

and finally an introduction of the evil one

into the scene (III, 19–21), by whom the

human race is led astray (III, 21–23) in order

to be tested by the law of opposition in all

things (III, 23–25).

The Way Back: A Rigorous and

Dangerous Passage

What follows is man’s way on earth,

specifically his way back to the presence of

God. The road is dangerous, and the

candidates are charged to avoid all frivolity

and improper and lascivious behavior and to be most discreet in guarding the secrets. The

ultimate objectives of the whole discipline,

both here and hereafter, are set forth (IV, 2–

26).

IV, 2. And these are their ways upon the

earth…,

4. a spirit of understanding in the planning of

every undertaking, anxious to judge rightly

and act

5. in holiness constantly (firmly), active

(creative), with increase of charity to all

the Sons of Truth; and perfect (glorious)

purity, loathing all the impure idols, with

modest deportment (gait, going)

6. being discreet in all things while hiding

the truth of (concealing faithfully) the

secret teachings ( or secrets of

knowledge). These are the confidential

instructions ( or secrets) of the Spirit for the Sons of Truth [while on] earth.…For

healing

7. and increase of peace in length of days, to

be fruitful and multiply ( lit. fertility of seed), with all the blessings of eternity and

everlasting joy (joy of the eternities), in

eternal live(s) [ can also be read nētzaḥ,

victorious, brilliant, triumphant], with a

crown of glory

8. along with a garment of splendor in

eternal light.

9–14. [The fate of the unworthy is

described.]

13–14. weeping,…dark confusion,…

destruction.

15–20. [Everything is determined in the plan

of God according to set periods, to give

each a time of probation.]

15. Such are the generations of the children

of men and in their proper divisions each

of their groups receives its inheritance

according to their generations … ,

16. each individual receiving his inheritance whether great or small… .

18. And God in his deep designs and

glorious wisdom has placed a limit to the

existence of wrongdoing …

20. (until) the time set for the judgment … ,

at which time God will make clear by his

truth all the deeds of mankind and purify

for himself certain ones of the children of

men, abolishing every spirit of iniquity

from among them (him), removing every

spirit of iniquity that besets

21. his flesh, and purify him by the Holy

Ghost from all his iniquities. And he will

pour out upon him a spirit of truth like

water, purging away all abominable

falsehood …

22. to make known ( or instruct) the righteous by the knowledge of the Most High

( ʾElyôn) and by ( or in) the wisdom of the Sons of Heaven, for the enlightenment ( lit.

making intelligent) of those who are perfect in the way. For with them God has

chosen to make an eternal covenant.

23. And to them is all the glory of Adam… .

25. For God has placed them (good and evil)

in equal portions (side by side) until the

time is up and there is a new creation.

26. […] and he causes the children of men to

inherit, having a knowledge of good and

[evil], each [receiving] his portion (lot)

according to his spirit… .

The insistence on a fixed order for

everything is characteristic of the Qumran

community and is in direct opposition to that

totally unstructured Church of the Spirit

which was long held to be the essence of

early Christianity. The ultimate goal is

described in terms of the millennium and of

the heavenly Zion of Enoch. Until then, the

rule of the Two Ways was to hold sway. The

doctrine of the Two Ways, which

predominates in the earliest Christian writings, admonishes every individual that

he must choose between the Way of Light and

the Way of Darkness every day of his life as

long as he is in the flesh. Here it is presented

as the doctrine of the Two Spirits.

The Priesthood in Charge

The organization of the society exists only

to implement its main purpose, which is the

exaltation of the individual. The church is

not a service club, fraternal or benevolent

society, lodge, or social organization. All

activities are under the direction and

authority of the priesthood—“the priests…

keep the covenant” and are hence qualified

to serve in the temple when it shall be

restored in its purity (V, 1–VI, 14).

VI, 2. and they shall eat together,

3. and pray together, and take counsel

together. And in whatever place ten men of

the church organization (council) are met together, a priest shall not be lacking

among them;

4. and they shall sit each man according to

his proper place ( or rank, quality).…And

when they set the table to eat or drink of

the new wine ( tîrôsh, unfermented grape

juice)

5. the priest shall put forth his hand first of all to pronounce the blessing of the

firstfruits of the bread or wine [as the case

may be].

A Sacramental Meal

The separate blessing suggests a

sacramental meal, and at the end of the so-

called appendix to the 1QS the instructions

are more specific (1QSa II, 17–21).

II, 17. And if they meet (by appointment) for

the table of the church or to drink the new

wine, the table

18. of the church (congregation) being prepared and the wine [prepared] for

drinking, no man shall [put forth] his hand

for the first of ( or to begin)

19. the bread and [the wine,] until the priest;

for [it is he who] blesses the firstfruits of

the bread

20. and the new wine, and he shall [reach

forth] his hand for the bread before the

others, and after that the Messiah of Israel

shall put forth his hand

21. to the bread […] they shall bless (?) all

the meeting of the church […] according to

his office (dignity, greatness). And

according to this rule shall they do […] as

many as ten men meet together.

The mention of firstfruits of the bread and

wine implies that the priest speaks a formal

set blessing over the bread and wine

separately, regardless of the time of year—

whenever the meeting takes place. The

almost casual mention of the presence of the Messiah is significant since the sacramental

meal looks both backward and forward to

the visits of the Messiah: “Take, eat…in

remembrance of me.…This cup is the new

testament (covenant) in my blood.…drink in

remembrance of me” (1 Corinthians 11:24–

25). “This is my blood of the new testament.

…I will…drink it new with you in my

Father’s kingdom” (Matthew 26:28–29).

Today one purpose of the sacramental meal

in the church is “that they may always have

his Spirit to be with them” (Moroni 4:3; 5:2;

D&C 20:77, 79).

Participation in any rites and activities

requires a “recommend” from the “bishop”

(1QS VI, 13–27).

VI, 13. And all candidates from Israel

14. shall be examined by the paqid (visiting overseer, inspector, having the same

meaning as Greek episkopos, from which

comes our term bishop) as to his qualifications and past life… .

16–23. [He must undergo periods of

probation

before

earning

complete

membership.]

Rules of Behavior

The candidate is again charged to observe

strict rules of behavior, the violations of

which incur set penalties (VI, 24–VII, 1–25).

VI, 24–27. And these are the rules…with

regard to their (temporal) affairs.…The

most serious offenses are

VII, 1–9. If he curses or uses strong language

[the offender will be punished.]

5–9. [Dishonesty and deceit are not to be

tolerated.] …

12. [any impure practice]…who goes naked

before his neighbor

13. who spits during a meeting…who puts

forth his hand from his garment

14. showing his nakedness.…who laughs foolishly and loudly.

15. Who gossips about his neighbor

16. shall be ostracized for one year; but who

speaks evilly of others in a meeting of the

church shall be banished from among them

17. and never return again. And who

murmurs against the leadership of the

community shall be permanently

excommunicated.

18–25. [Going against the leadership of the

church entails the severest penalty of all.]

Preparation for a True Temple

The highest authority resides in a priestly

body whose primary qualification is humility

and whose real objective is to prepare for

the establishment of a temple in its

completeness (VIII, 1–21).

VIII, 1. There shall be in the council of the

church twelve men and three priests,

perfect in all that is revealed from all 2. the scriptures (Torah), to do truth and

righteousness and judgment and love of

mercy, each walking humbly with his

neighbor… .

5. To establish the true order of government

in the church, for the eternal planting of a

holy temple for Israel, and the (secret)

ordinances of a holy

6. of holies for Aaron, (to be) true witnesses,

for judgment and chosen ones of [God’s]

pleasure, for the redemption of the earth

(land) and for a recompense

7. to the wicked of their deserts. There will

be the tested wall ( or wall or partition of testing), the precious cornerstone [Isaiah

28:16].

8. Its foundations shall not shake nor be

moved from their place. A house ( mĕʿôn,

dwelling place, habitation) of the holy of

holies

9. for Aaron, for the instruction of all of them in (for) the covenant of judgment

(righteousness), and for the bringing of an

acceptable offering ( lit. and for the

offering of an agreeable odor), and for a

perfect and true temple in Israel.

10. To establish a covenant in accordance

with his everlasting principles (laws,

commandments).…When these have

walked perfectly in the way of the church

for two years,

11. they shall be set apart and sanctified

[ i.e., to prepare all the others], nothing being hidden from them

13. (then) according to these arrangements

they shall be removed from the dwelling

of the men of iniquity to go in the desert, to

prepare there the road of “He Who Is”

[Isaiah 40:3 has the Tetragrammaton

YHWH here, which the writer of the

scroll avoids by using a substitute].

The Temple Represents the Eternal Order

All look forward to the temple (VIII, 15–

IX, 26).

IX, 3. And when these things shall be in

Israel according to all these provisions,

for a foundation for the Holy Ghost in truth

4. eternal to atone for the guilt of

transgression and sinful action(s), as a

greater blessing for the earth than the flesh

of burnt offerings, the fattening (of beasts)

for slaughter; (rather) a heavenly offering

5. of the lips as prescribed (is)…as a free-

will offering, pleasing and acceptable. At

that time shall the men of the church be set

apart (separated),

6. a holy temple for Aaron, to be united in a

holy of holies and a single (common)

temple (house) for Israel such as walk

perfectly.

7. But the Sons of Aaron alone shall rule in matters of law (judgment) and property,

and upon them (upon their face) the

administration and the portion of the entire

government of the members of the church,

…

11. until there shall come a Prophet and the

Messiah of Aaron and Israel.

12. These are the statutes by which the

prudent ones walk, the whole rule of life

by which they identify themselves in each

dispensation ( lit. time by time), and by

which they are judged (weighed) man by

man (on an individual basis).…[The

themes of individuality and discretion are

developed in the lines that follow.]

17. [The whole operation is to be kept secret

from the world.] …

19. That is the time (the time has come) to

prepare the way

20. in the wilderness and to prepare their

minds for all that awaits doing … , 21. and these are the guidelines (rules of the

road)

for

the

instructor

in

those

circumstances (times) regarding both love

and hate… .

The new temple is contrasted with the old

one. For a decade the world has been

awaiting the publication (mere photographs

would do) of the great Temple Scroll, 7

pending which it is enough to note that the

expected temple was no mere abstract

edifice of spirit and allegory, as the later

Christians would have it. 8

The Preexistent Plan

Though by now it is quite obvious that the

Rule of the Community is no product of

rabbinic, halakhic, or “normative” Judaism,

it is the last two columns of the text that

transport us far beyond the familiar scope of

conventional Judaism and Christianity. First

we are shown the vast sweep of the plan from its background in the preexistent realm,

in which the temple by its appointments and

ordinances is seen to represent the eternal

and celestial order (X, 1–7).

X, 1. During the periods ( or in the regions; qētz is a marked-off extent of either time or space) in which [God] was establishing

the dominion of light with its cycles, and

when he gathered together at his appointed

place, at the beginning

2. of the initiation of the supervising bodies

( lit. night watch) of the darkness ( i.e., lights in the firmament); as he opened his

treasury and poured its contents upon the

earth, and as he cycled them and

condensed (gathered) them by virtue of the

light, even in the radiance

3. of the illuminators of the holy dwelling,

along with those he had assembled to the

abode of glory; when the set times

emerged according to the days of the month, coordinated (united) in their

revolutions (cycles) with

4. the passing of one into the other as they

renew themselves, the great M ( i.e., the

great day, New Year’s Day) stands for the

holy of holies and the symbol N for the key

of his eternal mercies, for opening ( or at the beginnings)

5. of the established seasons ( or festivals) in each period.…[More follows on the

observance of seasonal festivals—the

year-rites.]

Talk of the treasury and the cycles exactly

matches those descriptions of the creation

found in a number of Coptic Christian texts. 9

The code writing of the M and the N is

intentional, to judge by the Christian

parallels.

Hymn of Creation

The text now shifts to the first person in a triumphant conclusion that echoes the

Thanksgiving Hymn of Qumran and the

ancient Hymn of Creation. The individual

here orients himself in all the dispensations

of the world, as well as in the glories of the

preexistence and the eternities to come (X,

8–18):

X, 8. And as long as I live, the law of liberty

is on my tongue as fruits of praise and the

offering of my lips;

9. I shall sing with understanding, and all my

music (is) for the glory of God, and the

strings of my harp are for declaring

(describing, setting forth) his holiness, and

the flute of my lips shall exalt his never-

ending skill and judgment.

10. At the coming of day and night ( or the passing of day into night), I shall enter into

the covenant of ʾĒl, and with the coming of ( or at the gates of, as in Psalm 65:9)

evening and morning I shall recite his laws. And where they are I shall place

11. my own boundaries, from which I shall

not depart… .

13. At the beginning (at the creation),

stretching forth hands and feet, I praise his

name; at the first coming and going,

14. sitting and standing (rising), and lying

upon my bed, I sing unto him…after the

manner of men.

15. And before I lift my hand to cultivate [ lit.

fatten] the delights of the fruits of the earth

( or before I fatten myself with the

pleasures of the earth’s bounty); and at the

onset of fear and dread in the place of

distress and loneliness ( bûqāh, emptiness) 16. I will call upon (root *BRK; kneel to,

supplicate; or bless, praise) him in his

manifest wonders and prostrate myself ( or

humble myself; šaḥaḥ) for his mighty

deeds; and upon his mercies will I lean

continually (all the day). And I know that in his hand is the judging of

17. all that lives, and all his works are true.

…I shall not return to any man a

recompense

18. of evil. With good I shall pursue

mankind, for with God is the judgment of

all living, and he will repay to man his

deserts.

The Initiate as Adam

The identification of the individual with

the man Adam is unmistakable. From the

creation hymn we move to the creation of

man; his cultivating the garden and partaking

of the fruit are both conveyed in a single

sentence in line X, 15, the key to which is the

word for “pleasures,” using the root of

“Eden.” This is confirmed by the surprising

second half of the line, which abruptly turns

off the light and finds the singer “in a place

of sorrow and emptiness” —a dreary and lone world—but still calling upon God and

receiving his support. Recognizing God’s

mercy, forbearance, and sole right to judge,

he vows to forgive all beings their

trespasses against him.

Combat and Tribulation: A Dreary

World

The theme of the lines that follow is

combat and trial in a dark and dangerous

world—a psalm of tribulation, with the

imagery of the courtroom and a Negative

Confession (X, 18–XI, 2).

X, 20. I do not flinch (turn aside) before men

of deceit (twisting, false witnesses) and

am not satisfied until he has passed

judgment… .

22. Foolishness, falsehood, iniquity, deceit,

and lies will not be found on my lips, but

fruits of holiness on my tongue, and

abominations

23. shall not be found there… .

XI, 2. But as for me, God will judge me, and

in his hand is the perfection (correctness)

of my way and the uprightness of my heart.

Divine Guidance to a Glorious Goal

The conclusion that follows is on an

entirely positive note, the singer ending his

dangerous journey amidst the glorious

company in the presence of God (XI, 2–22).

XI, 2. [God is the guide whose hand leads

him safely along the way]

3. and by his righteous (provisions, pl.) he

will wipe out my transgression. For from

the fountain of his knowledge he has

brought forth (opened) his light. And he

has caused my eye(s) to behold his

marvelous works, and my mind has been

enlightened by performance of his mystery

(ordinance). 10

4. For the Eternal Being ( or eternal existence) is the support of my right hand.

On a mighty rock is the way of my steps,

which nothing can cause to shake. For the

truth of God is

5. the rock of my footsteps, and his strength

is the support of my right hand; and from

the fountain of his righteousness is my

judgment. His marvelous mysteries are a

light to my mind (heart);

6. my eye has beheld the things of the

eternities ( or by the Eternal One my eye

has discerned); special knowledge

( tûshiyyāh, knowledge conveyed in

confidence, as in Job 11:6) which is

hidden from men of learning, treasures of

wisdom hidden from the children of men, a

fountain of righteousness and a vessel

7. of power; also a place of glory for the

assembly in the flesh of those whom God

has chosen. He has established them as an

eternal treasure and caused them to be heirs in the portion (lot)

8. of the saints, and with the Sons of Heaven

he has associated their society, for the

council of the church and the assembly of

the holy habitation for an eternal planting

along with all past ages (dispensations).

As in the Book of Breathings, the Stone of

Truth is here closely associated with the

purification in water, and this opens the way

to further light and knowledge culminating in

the blessed assembly of the saints, which

like the Zion of Enoch is a heavenly

community duplicated (planted is the

technical word) on earth, becoming united in

the end with all other such bodies: “and it

shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of

all the creations which I have made” (Moses

7:64).

Glorified in the Presence of God

Now comes the great and marvelous paradox that staggers the imagination and

baffles credulity. The problem is how God

and man can not only share the same

universe of discourse but live together

forever on terms of intimacy amounting to

identity (XI, 9–22):

XI, 9. And as for me, I am a man (Adam) of

evil after the dictates of the wanton flesh;

my iniquities, transgression, and sins,

along with all the corruption of my mind

(heart)

10. belong to the brotherhood (secret

society) of the worm and to the ways of

darkness. For a man (Adam) goes his way,

but no man (Enosh) really determines his

steps, for the decision (judgment) is

God’s, and from his hand is ( i.e., he

determines, prescribes)

11. the perfect way, for it is his knowledge

that brought all into existence and his

plans that guide all things, and nothing happens without him. And even though I

12. trip, the mercies of God will always be

there to help me. And even though I

stumble in the perversity of the flesh, my

judging rests with God’s justice, an

assurance forever.

13. And if he allows (opens) troubles for

me, yet from the pit will he rescue (pull

up) my soul and guide my footsteps on the

road. By his acts of mercy he will cause

me to arrive, and by his loving kindnesses

provide (bring)

14. my reward (judgment). And with his true

judgment he has judged me, and in his

exceeding goodness has forgiven (atoned

for) even all of my iniquities. And by his

righteous provisions he purifies me from

the uncleanness

15. of men and from the sins of the children

of Adam, to praise the justice of God,

even the splendor of the Most High God.

Blessed art thou, my God, who openest the

[way of] knowledge

16. to thy servant. Guide all his works in

righteousness, and raise (him) up for a son

of thy truth (accept him as a true son)

according as thou art well pleased with

the chosen ones of Adam, that they may

dwell

17. in thy presence for all eternity. For

without thee there is no proper guidance,

and nothing is done without thine

approval. It is thou who showest forth

18. all knowledge, and all existence depends

upon thy good pleasure. And there is none

next in order beside thee to challenge

(reply to) thy suggestions (counsel) or to

give advice (enlighten)

19. in any matter on which thy holiness has

decided, or to penetrate into the depths of

thy mysteries, or to comprehend all thy

wondrous (doings), by thy power

20. of thy might. For who can contain

(measure) thy glory? And what also is the

son of man (Adam) amid thy marvelous

(works)?

21. And he that is born of woman to sit down

in thy presence? He being formed of dust;

…and he is made (formed) only

22. of clay of the destroyer (trashman, one

who sweeps aside), and towards dust is

his yearning. How does the clay sit down

with the potter (hand former), and for

counsel how does it qualify (what does it

discern)?

Notes

1. Frank Moore Cross Jr., “The Scrolls and the New Testament,” Christian Century 72 (1955): 969–70.

2. Georg Molin, Die Söhne des Lichtes (Vienna: Herold, 1954), 146.

3. Eduard Lohse, ed., Die Texte aus Qumran (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1964).

4. Lohse, Die Texte aus Qumran, 5.

5. On Qumran as a society of Enoch, see Cent Pieter van Andel, De Structuur van de Henoch-Traditie in het Nieuwe Testament (Utrecht: Kemink, 1955), 51–66.

6. See Marcus Jastrow, A Dictionary of the Targumim, the Talmud Babli and Yerushalmi, and the Midrashic Literature (New York: Pardes, 1950), 1:285.

7. [After the original publication of this book, the Temple Scroll was published in Hebrew as Yigael Yadin, ed., Megillat-Hammiqdāš (Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society, 1977); and in English as Yigael Yadin, ed., The Temple Scroll (Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society, 1983)—eds.]

8. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Christian Envy of the Temple,”

JQR 50 (1959–60): 99–106, reprinted in When the Lights Went Out: Three Studies on the Ancient

Apostasy (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), 93–98, and in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN

4:392–97.

9. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Treasures in the Heavens: Some Early Christian Insights into the Organizing of Worlds,”

Dialogue 8/3–4 (1973): 79–80, 84, reprinted in Old Testament and Related Studies, CWHN 1:177–79, 185–

86.

10. Zadokite Fragment (CD) III, 18; XVI, 2.

Appendix 2

From the Odes of Solomon

Description of the Text

At the beginning of the century, J. Rendel

Harris of Cambridge discovered the Odes of

Solomon in a Syriac text “written on paper, which came from the neighborhood of the

Tigris.” 1 In spite of its Eastern and Christian origin (disputed by some scholars), the work

shows undoubted affinities with the Dead

Sea Scrolls; a Jewish statement classifies it

“in a loose literary genre” with the

Thanksgiving Psalms from Qumran, noting

that while “the doctrinal type of the

Christianity expressed by the Odes is not

easy to classify, … it is certainly early and,

therefore, the possibility that the Odes

represent some group of Christians which was influenced by the Dead Sea sect (or

some similar Jewish sect) cannot be

denied.” 2

A key to the dating of the Odes is the

Fourth Ode, which Harris places either

“soon after A.D. 70” or (less possibly)

“soon after A.D. 135. ”3 It deals with the temple, but since the language of the ode

implies, for Harris, that the temple at

Jerusalem was no longer standing, he refers

it to one of the two Jewish temples in Egypt,

namely, “the temple of Onias at

Leontopolis,” which was destroyed by the

Romans in A.D. 73. 4 That the rites of the temple are, in fact, the theme of the Odes

becomes increasingly apparent in comparing

them with other texts. In particular, Harris

has discussed their close affinity with the

Pistis Sophia (see appendix 3), which

occasionally quotes directly from the Odes,

and notes that these two works “are as Gnostic as the New Testament, no more and

no less. ”5

The Syriac text is supplied by Harris, from

whose translation the following selections

are taken. 6 Harris’s original brackets are found here in parentheses, to distinguish his

notes from my bracketed additions and

comments. There is a more recent translation

by Walter Bauer.7

Being, as the title indicates, a collection of

lyric poems, the Odes do not follow any

particular ritual order.

Nature and Purpose of the Book

Ode 23:5. [The teachings of this book are]

like a letter …

6. and many hands rushed to the letter to

seize it … and read it:

7. and it escaped their fingers and they were

affrighted at it and the seal that was upon

it.

8. Because it was not permitted to them to

loose its seal …

11. and there was with it a sign of the

Kingdom and of the Government.

15. The letter was one of command. …

19. And the letter was … wholly written by

the finger of God.

Ode 9:12–13. All those who have conquered

shall be written in His book. For their

book is victory which is yours.

Ode 8:11. Keep my secret, ye who are kept

by it [a famous saying, quoted by the early

fathers].

Purification Rites

Ode 6:7–8. For there went forth a stream …

and it brought (water) to the Temple.

11. From the Most High the draught [of life]

was given.

12. Blessed then are the ministers of that

draught who are entrusted with that water of His.

14. Souls that were near to departing they

have caught back from death:

15. and limbs that had fallen they

straightened and set up …

17. and they lived by the water of life for

ever [purification as resurrection].

Ode 11:5. And I was established upon the

rock of truth [ šuʿa da-šrara, meaning a

firm or true foundation], where He had set

me up:

6. and speaking waters touched my lips from

the fountain of the Lord.

Ode 9:8. An everlasting crown for ever is

Truth …

9. a stone [ kiʾfa] of great price it is.

Ode 11:9. I forsook the folly which is

diffused over the earth; and I stripped it

off and cast it from me:

10. and the Lord renewed me in His raiment,

and possessed me by His light.

Ode 21:2. And I put off darkness and clothed

myself with light, and my soul acquired a

body.

Ode 25:8. And I was clothed with the

covering of thy Spirit, and thou didst

remove from me my raiment of skin.

Ode 4:8. For thy seal is known: and thy

creatures know it: and thy (heavenly) hosts

possess it: and the elect archangels are

clad with it.

Ode 23:1. Joy is of the saints! and who shall

put it on, but they alone?

Ode 24. [Harris sees in this ode a connection

between baptism, anointing, and the

deliverance of the dead, the common

theme being resurrection. He notes that “in

the earliest times the Baptism of Christ

was the occasion of His triumph over

Hades. We find suspicious hints of this in

… a statement made by Seth concerning

his father Adam that he will receive the oil of healing from Paradise in the last

days.”]8

The Creation Motif

Ode 16 is a creation hymn:

Ode 16:11. He spread out the earth and He

settled the waters in the sea:

12. He measured the heavens and fixed the

stars: and He established the creation and

set it up:

13. and He rested from His works …

16. and the worlds [plural!] were made by

His word, and by the thought of His heart

[cf. Ode 7:19–27].

Ode 7:28. For He hath given a mouth to His

creation, to open the voice of the mouth

towards Him, to praise Him:

29. confess ye His power.

Ode 8:21. I willed and fashioned mind and

heart: and they are mine, and by my own

right hand have I set my elect ones.

Ode 8:16. For I know them, and before they

came into being I took knowledge of them,

and on their faces I set my seal:

17. I fashioned their members: my own

breasts I prepared for them that they might

drink my holy milk and live thereby. …

19. For my workmanship are they and the

strength of my thoughts.

Ode 7:10. He who created wisdom [ ḥekmta,

sophia] is wiser than His works:

11. and He who created me when yet I was

not knew what I should do.

Ode 11:12. [Like the Book of Breathings,

this describes the creation of man as an

awakening, i.e., resurrection, by the rays of the rising sun:] And the Lord was like

the Sun shining on the face of the land;

13. He lightened my eyes, and my face

received the dew; and my nostrils enjoyed

the pleasant odour of the Lord [the snsn

motif].

Ode 15:1. As the sun is the joy to them that

seek for its daybreak, so is my joy in the

Lord;

2. because He is my Sun and His rays have

lifted me up; and His light hath dispelled

all darkness from my face.

3. In Him I have acquired eyes and have seen

His holy day:

4. ears have become mine [the Opening of

the Mouth motif]. …

7. According to His excellent beauty He hath

made me.

8. I have put on incorruption … and have put

off corruption. …

9. Death hath been destroyed before my face

[throughout, creation is equated to

resurrection].

The Garden Drama

Ode 11:10. [Newly created man is placed in

the garden], and the Lord renewed me in His raiment, and possessed me by His

light, and from above He gave me rest in

incorruption;

11. and I became like the land which

blossoms and rejoices in its fruits.

13. He lightened my eyes and my face

received the dew; and my nostrils enjoyed

the pleasant odour of the Lord;

14. and He carried me to His Paradise;

where is the abundance of the pleasure of

the Lord. …

15. And I said, Blessed, O Lord, are they

who are planted in thy land! and those who

have place in thy Paradise;

16. and they grow by the fruits of thy trees.

Ode 12:2. And like the flow of waters flows

truth from my mouth, and my lips show

forth His fruit.

Ode 8:3. To bring forth fruit to the Lord,

living, … holy fruit; and to converse with

care in His light. 9

4. Rise up, and stand erect. …

9. Hear the word of truth, and receive the

knowledge of the Most High.

Ode 20:7. But put on the grace of the Lord

… and come into His Paradise and make

thee a garland from its tree,

8. and … recline on His rest.

Ode 38:18. For He set the root and watered

it and fixed it and blessed it; and its fruits

are for ever.

20. And the Lord alone was glorified in His

planting and His husbandry …

21. by the beautiful planting of His right-

hand: and by the discovery of His planting,

and by the thought of His mind. Hallelujah.

The Way Back

Ode 7:11. [The way back has been provided

from the first.] He who created me …

knew what I should do when I came into

being:

12. wherefore He pitied me in His abundant

grace: and granted me to ask from Him and

to receive from His sacrifice [the atoning

sacrifice prepared from the foundation of

the world].

Ode 15:6. The way of error I have left, and

have walked toward Him, and have

received salvation from Him, without

grudging.

Ode 33:11. My chosen ones walk in me, and

my ways I will make known to them that

seek me, and I will make them trust in my

name. Hallelujah.

Ode 24:10. For the Lord disclosed His way,

and spread abroad His grace: and those

who understood it, know His holiness.

Hallelujah.

Ode 38:1. I went up to the light of truth as if

into a chariot [ markabta; can also mean

ship]:

2. and the Truth took me and led me … and from the rocks and the waves it preserved

me [plainly a water journey].

Ode 11:3. And I ran in His way … even in

the way of truth:

4. from the beginning and even to the end I

acquired His knowledge.

Ode 38:4. [The guide is important.] [Truth]

went with me and made me rest, and

suffered me not to wander …

5. and I ran no risk, because I walked with

Him;

6. and I did not make an error in anything

because I obeyed the Truth.

7. For … Truth proceeds in the right path,

and

8. whatever I did not know, it made clear to

me. …

15. And I was made wise so as not to fall

into the hands of the Deceiver; and I

rejoiced in myself because the Truth went

with me,

16. and I was established and lived and was

redeemed.

Ode 17:4. I received the face and fashion of

a new person: and I walked in it and was

saved;

5. and the thought of truth led me on. And I

walked after it and did not wander.

Ode 8:7. For the right hand of the Lord is with you: and He is your helper.

Tried and Tested

Ode 39:1. [The initiate passes through great

dangers.] Great rivers …

2. carry headlong those who despise Him:

and entangle their paths:

3. and catch their bodies and destroy their

lives. …

5. [But] those who walk on them without

blemish shall not be afraid.

6. For the sign in them is the Lord; and the

sign is the way of those who cross in the name of the Lord.

10. And the waves are lifted up on this side

and that, but the footsteps of our Lord

Messiah stand firm. …

11. And a way has been appointed for those

who cross after Him.

Ode 11:1. [On the symbolic sacrifice:] My

heart was cloven [Harris’s note: or

circumcised, ethgzar, cut painfully10] …

and grace sprang up in it

2. for the Most High clave me [Harris’s note:

or circumcised me; 11 lit. inflicted a cut upon me], by His Holy Spirit and searched

my affection toward him [Harris’s note:

lit. “revealed my reins”; cf. Psalm 7:9,

Revelation 2:23]. 12

3. And His opening [ lit. cutting] of me

became my Salvation.

Ode 28:5. The sword shall not divide me

from Him, nor the scimitar;

6. for I am ready before destruction comes

…

9. and my oppression became my salvation

…

16. and vainly did they make attack upon me

[Harris’s note: “Perhaps, then, the writer

is speaking, in these verses, as if in the

person of Christ.”]13

Ode 12:3. And He has caused His

knowledge to abound in me, because the

mouth of the Lord is the true Word, and the

door of His light.

Ode 17:8. He gave me the way of His

precepts [Harris’s note: lit. steps;

degrees]14 and I opened the doors that were closed, …

10. nothing appeared closed to me: because I

was the door of everything.

Ode 22:1. [The combat motif is

conspicuous.] He who brought me down

from on high, also brought me up from

regions below.

3. He who scattered my enemies and my

adversaries.

5. He that overthrew by my hands the dragon

with seven heads [cf. the seven monsters

of the Book of Breathings].

7. Thy right hand destroyed his wicked

poison.

Ode 29:4. [He] brought me up out of the

depths of Sheol: and from the mouth of

death He drew me:

5. and I laid my enemies low.

10. And the Lord overthrew my enemy by

His word; and he became like stubble

which the winds carry away.

Ode 5:4. My persecutors will come and not

see me:

5. a cloud of darkness shall fall on their

eyes; and an air of thick gloom shall

darken them:

6. and they shall have no light to see: that

they may not take hold on me

8. for they have devised a counsel, and it did

not succeed: they have prepared

themselves for evil, and were found to be

empty. [This is a legal terminology of the

law court, as is the following:]

Ode 33:10. I am your judge; and they who

have put me on shall not be injured: but

they shall possess the new world that is

incorrupt.

Ode 9:12. [The victory motif is

conspicuous.] All who have conquered

shall be written in His book.

13. For their book is victory which is yours.

And she [Victory; cf. Maat] … wills that

you shall be saved.

Ode 8:7. For the right hand of the Lord is

with you: and He is your helper:

8. and peace was prepared for you; before

ever your war was.

Ode 18:6. Let not the luminary be conquered

by the darkness; nor let truth flee away from falsehood.

7. Thou wilt appoint me to victory; our

Salvation is in thy right hand.

Ode 1:1. [The Odes begin with a coronation song:] My Lord is on my head like a

crown, and I shall not be without Him.

2. They wove for me a crown of truth. …

3. Thou livest on my head and thou hast

blossomed on my head [the owners of the

Breathings texts wore crowns of leaves

and flowers].

Ode 9:8. An everlasting crown is Truth

[Maat]. Blessed are they who set it on

their heads… .

11. Put on the crown in the true covenant … ,

12. and all those who have conquered shall

be written in His book.

Ode 17:8. [The victory over the underworld

is the motif of the Christian descensus, the

Lord’s descent to deliver the spirits in

prison, the harrowing of hell:] And I opened the doors that were closed,

9. and brake in pieces the bars of iron …

10. nothing appeared closed to me: because I

was the door of everything.

11. And I went over all my bondmen to loose

them … ,

12. and I imparted my knowledge without

grudging … ,

14. and they were gathered to me and were

saved.

Ode 31:1. The abysses were dissolved

before the Lord: and darkness was

destroyed by His appearance.

Ode 42:15. Sheol saw me and was made

miserable:

16. death cast me up and many along with

me.

17. I had gall and bitterness, and I went

down with him to the utmost … depth: …

19. and I made a congregation of living men

amongst his dead men, and I spake with them by living lips …

21. and those who had died ran toward me:

and they cried and said, Son of God, have

pity on us

22. and bring us out from the bonds of

darkness: and open to us the door by

which we shall come out to thee.

23. For we see that our death has not touched

thee.

24. Let us also be redeemed with thee: for

thou art our Redeemer.

25. And I heard their voice; and my name

was heard over their heads:

26. for they are free men and they are mine.

Hallelujah.

Concluding Rites

Ode 42:1. [This, the last of the Odes,

presents the last of the ordinances, with a

final section on salvation for the dead (see

preceding section):] I stretched out

[ pešṭet, opened or reached out] my hands

and approached my Lord:

2. for the stretching out [ matḥa, a different word, meaning properly grasp or clasp] of

my hands is His sign:

3. my extension [ pešiṭuty]15 is the outspread tree which was set up on the way of the

Righteous One.

4. And I became of no account [ la ḥašḥu, not useful, significant] to those who did not

take hold of me [ ʾeḥidin, grasp by the

hand]; and I shall be with those who love

me… .

9. Like the arm of the bridegroom over the

bride,

10. so was my yoke over those that know me.

Ode 3:2. And his members are with him.

And on them do I hang, and He loves me

[ ḥbb, the word for love here is the

universal Semitic term for love, meaning

to hug or embrace]:

3. for I should not have known how to love

the Lord, if He had not loved me [ rḥam, a different word for love, having the sense

of loving kindness]. …

8. I have been united (to Him) [Harris notes

the literal meaning of “mingled with (as

water with wine); cf. 1 Corinthians 6:17,”

i.e., the unio mystica]16

9. because I shall love Him that is the Son,

that I may be a son [Harris notes that this

is properly the Son];17

10. for he that is joined to [ metnaqaf, lit.

embraced by] Him that is immortal, will

also himself become immortal.

Ode 37:1. I stretched out my hands to my

Lord: and to the Most High I raised my

voice:

2. and I spake with the lips of my heart; and

he heard me, when my voice reached Him.

3. His answer came to me, and gave me the

fruits of my labours.

Ode 28:1. As the wings of doves over their

nestlings; and the mouth of their nestlings

towards their mouths,

2. so also are the wings of the Spirit over my

heart:

3. my heart is delighted and exults: like the

babe who exults [Harris notes: or, leaps]18

in the womb of his mother.

Ode 27:1. [This is the entire Ode:] I

stretched out my hands and sanctified the

Lord:

2. for the extension of my hands is His sign:

3. and my expansion is the upright tree ( or

cross). [Of this Harris writes: “So it is

very likely that the figure in our Psalm is

one of the oldest forms of Christian

symbolic teaching.”]19

Ode 14:4. Stretch out to me, O Lord, … thy

right hand: and be my guide even unto the

end.

Ode 36:3. [He joins the company of the blessed:] (The Spirit) brought me forth

before the face of the Lord: and, although a

son of man, I was named the Illuminate,

the Son of God:

4. while I praised amongst the praising ones,

and great was I amongst the mighty ones

… ,

6. and I became one of His neighbors.

Ode 41:5. Let us, therefore, all of us unite

together in the name of the Lord

6. and let our faces shine in His light.

8. For from another race am I:

9. for the Father of truth remembered me: He

who possessed me from the beginning.

Notes

1. J. Rendel Harris, The Odes and Psalms of Solomon (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1909), 3.

2. Jacob Licht, “Solomon, Odes of,” Encyclopedia Judaica (Jerusalem: Keter, 1971–72), 15:114–15.

3. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 58.

4. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 57.

5. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 13.

6. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 89–138.

7. Walter Bauer, Odes of Solomon, in Neutestamentliche Apokryphen in deutscher Übersetzung, ed. and trans.

Edgar Hennecke and Wilhelm Schneemelcher, 3rd ed.

(Tübingen: Mohr, 1959–64), 2:576–625. Cf. Walter

Bauer, ed. and trans., Die Oden Salomos (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1933); Jérôme-Dominique-Raymond Labourt

and Pierre Batiffol, eds. and trans., Les Odes de Salomon (Paris: Gabalde-Lecoffre, 1911); James H.

Charlesworth, ed. and trans, The Odes of Solomon (Chico, Calif.: Scholars, 1977); James H. Charlesworth,

“Odes of Solomon,” in OTP 2:725–71; John H. Bernard, The Odes of Solomon (1912; reprint, Nendeln, Liecht.: Kraus, 1967); in some of these the versification has changed slightly.

8. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 123.

9. My translation.

10. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 104 n. 1.

11. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 104 n. 2.

12. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 104 n. 3.

13. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 127.

14. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 112 n. 2.

15. My translation.

16. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 90 n. 1.

17. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 90 n. 2.

18. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 126 n. 1.

19. Harris, Odes and Psalms of Solomon, 126.

Appendix 3

The Pearl

Description of the Text

The recent increase in available

Mandaean and Manichaean texts has put the

beautiful and fanciful imagery of the early

Christian hymn known as The Pearl into a

clearly marked category of ritual literature,

its plot and setting being very close to those

of Books of Breathings. Every student of this

poem has been quick to point out the striking

parallels found in a wide range of oriental

and classical sources, and it should not be

hard to establish ties between it and the

Breathings literature, especially through

Coptic sources. 1 The text of The Pearl is in Syriac and is found in the Acts of Thomas

Judas the Apostle; it is dated by Walter Crum to the first century A.D. 2 and by Alfred Adam to between A.D. 50 and 70, making it

contemporary with the Joseph Smith Book of

Breathings.3 It was first translated into English by W. Wright in 1871. Following is

a summary and paraphrase of the Syriac text

given by Gustav Hoffmann, 4 checked against translations of Albertus F. J. Klijn, 5 and those of Alfred Adam, Gunther Bornkamm,

and Montague R. James. 6

The Situation

Thomas is confined in prison by order of

the Indian King Mazdai and his wicked

minister Karish, who accuse him of sorcery.

“And whilst he was praying, all those who

were in the prison saw that he was praying,

and begged him to pray for them too. And

when he had prayed and sat down, Judas

began to chant this hymn.” 7 Thus The Pearl

has the same theme as the (earlier) Psalms of Thomas8 and as the Book of Breathings—

namely, the yearning of the living and the

dead for deliverance from the dark prison of

this world and of the underworld

respectively; since the hero brings such

deliverance, we have a descensus situation,

as in the Egyptian Amduat and Breathings

literature, showing the way of escape to them

that sit in darkness.

The First Primeval Childhood

1–2: In my first primeval childhood ( kad

ʾena šbar yalud), I was nurtured in the

royal house of my Father with loving care

in the midst of abundance and glory.

The speaker may be either the redeemed

soul telling of its deliverance or the Savior

himself, or it may be both, according to

Bornkamm, since both have the same origin,

nature, and destiny. 9 In the Mandaean

version, the royal house is called the House of Life. 10

3: Then my parents sent me forth from our

home in the east [the source of light],

supplied with all necessities,

Adam: Reisezehrung (food or a meal

ticket). 11

Bornkamm: Wegzehrung und Reisegeld …

als Wege- oder Brückengeld (food for the

road and travel money to pay for tolls or

bridges). 12

Klijn: My parents equipped me (and) sent

me forth. 13 [Could it be zaudu written for zaudaqa, a ticket, passport?]

4: making a packet for me from our rich

storehouse.

5: It was sizeable, but light enough for me to

carry

6: [containing] gold from the house on high,

silver from the great treasury. 14

In a study entitled “Treasures in the Heavens,” I have shown that the heavenly

treasury contains the treasures of wisdom—

specifically knowledge of the ordinances, in

the Mandaean and Manichaean teaching—

which correspond to the earthly treasures of

knowledge in the temple. This is the

Egyptian House of Gold. Merit acquired on

earth is added to the treasure laid up in

heaven. 15

7: Precious stones from India and Kushan,

8: And they girt me ( ḥazquny) with a

diamond ( bʾadamus).

We associated Adam’s diamond with the

Stone of Truth in the Book of Breathings.16 In this context the diamond identifies the

speaker with Adam, 17 while the significance of the girdle is seen in the ritual girdle of the

Mandaeans, meant to give security to the

wandering guest on this earth; the prevailing

of the diamond over steel signifies that the true nature of the spirit can never be entirely

destroyed by earthly elements.18 This is confirmed by Klijn’s rendering, “they

furnished me with adament [ sic] which can

crush iron,” 19 the coincidence of the words Adam, diamond, and adamant being intentional. We have shown elsewhere that

the diamond in the girdle is the stone of life

(sometimes the plant of life), which, in the

Alexander legend, the hero bears with him,

having fetched it from the underworld; the

hero leaves the girdle and its precious stone

on the bank as he bathes in a deep pool, and

the serpent steals them, thus robbing him of

the hope of immortality. This story is told not

only of Alexander but also of the very

ancient Gilgamesh, taking it back to the

beginning of history. 20

The Dangerous Mission

9: They removed from me the garment of light, which they had made for me in love.

The garment represents the preexistent

glory of the candidate. 21 When he leaves on his earthly mission, it is laid up for him in

heaven to await his return. It thus serves as

security and lends urgency and weight to the

need for following righteous ways on earth.

For if one fails here, one loses not only one’s

glorious future in the eternities to come, but

also the whole accumulation of past deeds

and accomplishments in the long ages of

preexistence.22

In some texts the garment is kept folded

beneath the throne of God, awaiting the

return of the owner.23

10: And my purple [Bornkamm:

scharlachfarbene, scarlet]24 robe, made exactly to fit me.

This outer garment is the garment of the high priest as depicted in the murals of the

Dura Europos synagogue25 and in other sources; the two garments go together and

make a unity, but the white undergarment is

the proper preexistent glory of the wearer,

while the other is the priesthood later added

to it. 26 Note that the individual’s garment fits him and no one else.

11: And they made a covenant with me and

wrote in my heart, lest I go astray.

The letter is, among other things, a birth

certificate that shows the holder to be

beyond the ultimate powers of this

corruptible world and so guarantees that his

progress shall be eternal, an incrementum ad

aeternum. 27

12: [He was instructed to go down into

Egypt and bring back a pearl,]

13: which is in the sea, guarded

(surrounded) by a (fire or poison) snorting serpent [Adam and Bornkamm: dragon.]28

One thinks at once of the Egyptian Setne

story. 29 Here, as elsewhere, the serpent represents the perishability of all earthly or

physical things, corruptible hylē, the

ouroboros, the frustrated consumer of its own substance, 30 presenting the great obstacle to the further progress and spiritual

development of the hero, who can only get

the pearl with great toil and danger: “The

soul must exert itself and make full use of its

free agency” to accomplish its mission.31

The pearl is the soul itself, rescued and

returned from the depths. 32 Hoffmann sees in it also the individual’s “capacity for growth

… even in an alien … environment; the goal

of this growth is realizing the full capacities

of the personality.” 33

14: [Returning with the pearl, he may resume

his garment of light and the outer (priestly) mantle]

15: and become the heir to our kingdom,

along with our Second One ( trayanan) ,

The Second One is not the second-born,

but “next” or “second” in line to the throne,

the second in glory, the successor, i.e., the

first-born.34 It is Christ, the elder brother.

16: [Two guides or guardians, official

couriers who know the way, were sent

down with him;

17–18: they arrived at Maišan, where the

merchants of the east gather,]

Maišan is the place of transition between

worlds, neither heaven nor earth but in

between; it is the “midpoint” of the winter

solstice, which is as far as the sun descends;

it is the realm ruled by the planets, the

zodiac, etc. 35 It is on the border of the sea, the tehom, the jumping-off place—a creation

room, the place where the hero must change his clothes (line 72) and part with his

heavenly guides, who can accompany him no

further (line 20). 36

19: and came to the country of Babel,

entering the walls of Sarbug.

Babel is the symbol of the idolatrous and

materialistic world (Revelation 18).

Hoffmann notes that this can hardly have

been the Mesopotamian Babylon, which at

the time was completely insignificant. 37 Of considerably more importance was the

Babylon in the Delta of Egypt; when

Abraham went down to Egypt to receive the

lowest degrees of initiation, before returning

to Bethel to complete his initiation, he had to

pass through Babylon, the merchant city in

the Delta. 38

The resemblance between the name

Sarbug and the ancient Mesopotamian city of

Surrupak was early noted by scholars, but the identity was rejected on geographical

grounds. The Greek text has Labyrinth

instead of Sarbug, and Crum notes that the

Arabic word šarbūka also means

“labyrinth,” referring to the maze of alleys in

the center of Babylon city; 39 Adam notes that the Akkadian name of Ḥarran also means

“street” and suggests that we have here the

center of the ruling planets. 40 It is a symbolic and ritual city: Surrupak was the city of

Gilgamesh; and the importance of the

labyrinth as the difficult and dangerous way of the initiate in the (under)world is well

known.

The Fall of Man

20: [Here the guides left him on his own, and

he went on toward Egypt.]

Egypt means the same as spiritual Sodom

(Tobit 8:3; Revelation 11:8; 13:2, 4; 16:10);

it is this telestial world.

21: [In Egypt he immediately looked up the

serpent and found him at an inn.]

He has the mistaken idea that he can match

wits with the serpent and win at once—but

that is hopelessly naive.41

22: [He also put up at the inn (Gasthaus,42

Rasthaus, 43 Herberge44), in order to catch the dragon asleep.]

Hoffmann notes that Satan is also a

traveler in the earth (Job 1:6–7; 1 Peter 5:8)

who puts up at the inn, or vanity fair, 45 a world of tawdry wares and greedy

merchants.46

24–28. [There he met a young nobleman

from his own country, born in the

covenant, with whom he shares full

confidence, and he warned him against the

temptations and defilements of Egypt.]

The young nobleman is variously

interpreted as the uncorrupted spirit of the

saint in the world, the heavenly Bar-mšîḫê

who keeps the covenant, i.e., the person’s

higher nature. The fact that this youth is no

more heard from after the candidate adopts

the vicious ways of the world seems to rule

out his identification with a guardian angel,

or even with the church as companion,

counselor, and guide. 47

29: [To avoid arousing suspicions as a

stranger, he adopted the dress of the

Egyptians,

31: but they still noticed that he was an alien

32: and inveigled him into partaking of the native food,]

Recall that he had brought his own food in

his pack (lines 4–5).

34: [whereupon he forgot that he was the son

of a king, and served their king; ]

You cannot serve both—you must love one and hate the other (Matthew 6:24).

35: [The rich food dulled his senses and he

fell into a deep sleep.]

B-yuqra da-trufayhun, “by the richness of

their tryphē” ; even the non-Christian Greek writers see in tryphē—luxury, gourmet food, spoiled appetites for everything—the root of

all evil. The forgetting and falling asleep is

the Platonic cup of Lethe. 48 Hoffmann suggests that the heavy food is the false

philosophies of men, based on the intellect

and senses alone. By the sleep and

forgetting, he has become as a little child. 49

Recalled by a Letter

36: [Meanwhile, the heavenly parents, aware

of what had happened,

37: called a family council

38: of all the great and noble relatives,

39: who decided it was time to act.

40: They drafted and all signed a letter,

addressed]

41–42: To our Son in Egypt, [from] thy

Father the King of Kings, thy Mother, the

Queen of the East, and our Second One,

thy Brother.

In “the upper region … [t]he soul has a

father and a mother, as the [b]ody has a

father and mother in this world.” 50

43: Awake, arise from thy sleep! Heed this

letter;

44: remember that you are the son of a king,

and take a good look at your present

master!

45: Remember your mission—to fetch the

pearl;

46: remember the garment and robe that are

awaiting you

47: so that you can put them on again when

your name is called out from the book of those who were valiant

48: and you become the heir to our kingdom

along with your Brother, the successor to

our throne.

James: Thy name is named (in) the book of

life, and with thy Brother whom that hast

received <thou shalt be> in our kingdom. 51

(Hoffmann notes that this is not the Book of

Life that one would normally expect. )52

Klijn: When thy name hath been read out in

the list of the valiant, and with thy brother,

our viceroy, thou shalt be in our kingdom!

53

Adam: That thy name may be read out in

the Book of Heroes, and that thou with thy

brother, our Prince, mightest be together in

our kingdom! 54

Bornkamm: So that thy name be read in the

Book of Heroes, and thou mightest become

heir in our kingdom, along with thy brother,

our lieutenant ( Stellvertreter). 55

Compare Doctrine and Covenants 76:76–

79: “These are they who receive of his glory,

but not of his fulness … who receive of the

presence of the Son, but not of the fulness of

the Father… . These are they who are not

valiant … wherefore, they obtain not the

crown over the kingdom of our God.” In this

vision, given to Joseph Smith in 1832, it is

plain that those who are valiant obtain the crown along with the Son. Here we have the

explanation for leaving one’s happy heavenly

home for a sojourn in a wicked world. Only

so can one overcome and be written in the

Book of Heroes. Without confronting and

overcoming the powers of darkness, no one

can lay claim to the highest glory, the

kingship itself. Hence the need for the danger

and struggle here below.

49: The king with his right hand sealed the

letter against

50: the evil children of Babylon and the

rebellious spirits of Sarbug.

That is, he protected it against those who

might delay or waylay it. Sarbug appears as

the purlieu of the fallen angels, who traffic

with the worldly people of Babylon.

51: [The letter reached him as an eagle, king

of the birds.]

This was originally the sun-bird (the

phoenix of the resurrection) and later the

figure of the Redeemer.56

When Adam, being drugged, fell into a

deep sleep and forgot everything, it was an

eagle that came and awakened and instructed

him.57

Here one thinks of course of the Egyptian

Horus-hawk as messenger to the sleeping

king, and of King Solomon’s Huhhud, which drops the sealed letter on the bosom of the

sleeping Queen of Sheba, who awakens and

submits to the instructions of the divine

missive.

52: [It alighted by his side] and became all

speech

53: [whereupon he awoke and arose from his

sleep.]

This shows it to be, according to Alfred

Adam, the message of the Living Spirit to the

man Adam, but also to any soul in need of deliverance. 58

The Road Back

54: [He kissed the letter, broke the seal, and

read,

55: Lo, it is the same letter as that which he

brought with him from on high written in

his heart.

56: He remembered that he was a king’s son,

and his royal nature asserted itself.]

From this point on, everything is in

reverse. Bornkamm observes that it is

important to recognize the double nature of the events in the story, where awakening,

remembering, journey, etc., occur twice.59

One thinks of how the pyramid rites, upon

reaching the lowest point in the deepest and

darkest chamber, abruptly do an about-face

as the entourage starts moving in the

opposite direction—always upward, toward

the light and the real release from the bonds

of death. 60

Thus the temple ordinances properly begin

in darkness and end in a blaze of light.

57: [He remembered the pearl

58: and set about lulling the serpent to sleep,

59: invoking over it the name of his Father]

60: and of our Second, and of my Mother the

Queen of the East.

Scholars naturally interpret this as the

Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, thereby running

into serious complications which cannot be

treated here.

61: [Having seized the pearl he does an

about-face, wholly drawn in one direction

—toward his Father’s house, having at this

point reached the uttermost depths (line

13).

62: First he shed his filthy garments and left

them behind in the world where they

belong.

63: He set his course undeviatingly] toward

the light of our home in the East:

64: [The letter that awoke him also led the

way,

65: both as a guiding voice and a guiding

light.

66: It was a real document, written on paper

or silk of high sheen with red ink,]

Hoffmann: on Chinese paper with Rötel

(red crayon) 61

Bornkamm: Auf chinesischem Gewebe mit

Rötel (on Chinese fabric with red crayon) 62

Adam: For the royal (?) silk gleamed before

me with its shining colors 63

James: For at times the royal garment of silk

<shone> before mine eyes 64

It will be recalled that the Book of

Breathings was written “on royal linen,”

according to instructions enclosed, and yet it

was actually on paper. In leading the

candidate to his heavenly goal, it performs

exactly the same functions as the prince’s

letter in The Pearl,

67: [encouraging the traveler by its guiding

voice,]

Klijn: and with its voice and with its

guidance it also encouraged me to speed. 65

Hoffmann: comforting his fears on the

way. 66

It is plain that the journey is a strenuous

and a perilous one.

68: and drawing him on with love.

69: [He successfully passed through Sarbug

and left Babylon on his left,]

That is, he passed through the trials and

tests of the dark labyrinth, which throughout

the world represents the journey of the soul

out of the bonds of the underworld. Leaving

Babylon on the left is significant.

70: and so reached Maišan, the port of the

merchants

71: on the shore of the sea.

He has made his perilous water crossing.

He has reached the transition place, the

horizon of the east, where he may at last

resume his heavenly garment. This is where

the Book of Breathings properly begins with

the passage through the waters of birth,

purification, etc.

Return to the Heavenly Home

72: [His garment of light and his outer robe were waiting for him here; ]

Note that raiment is put on not only at the

beginning of the journey and at the end, but is

also donned at intermediate stages.

73: [they had been sent ahead from home by

his parents, in the custody of the

74: two faithful guides.

75: He had forgotten how glorious the

clothing was, having lost his childhood

memories of home,

76: but the moment he saw it, it all came

back to him, and he saw himself as he was

—as if in a mirror—

77: he and the garment completely identified

with each other

78: as a single individual—though they were

separate.

79: He noticed the same phenomenon in the

two guides that brought the garment:

80: that there were two of them, but each bore the identical token of the king.]

The tokens were marks:

Klijn: for one sign of the king was written

on them (both). 67

Adam: For the seal of the King was stamped

on them. 68

Bornkamm: For the same single sign

( Zeichen) of the king was engraved

( eingezeichnet) for them. 69

James: One royal sign was set upon both of

them.70

The Mysterious Garment or

Hanging

81: [By this sign he also reclaimed his own

inheritance,]

The sign was given:

Adam: from the hand of him who returned

my treasure and my wealth to me by their

hand. 71

Klijn: One sign … of the hands of him who

restored to me through them my trust and

my wealth. 72

Hoffmann: Who [the king or the sign?]

through them returned to me the honor of

my deposited treasure ( Pfand, endowment,

security) and riches. 73

Bornkamm: The sign (of him) who through

them gave back to me the (honor of) my

deposit and my wealth. 74

James: The money and wealth they had in

their hands, and paid me the due price. 75

82: [namely the garment,

83: with the gold and precious stones which

adorned it.]

84: [Translations vary.]

Hoffmann, Adam, and Bornkamm:

prepared in its full majesty. 76

Klijn: skillfully worked in its home on

high. 77

They were fastened above ( or in the height): What it says is that the thing was

suspended or fastened from the top ( b-

raumah matqna).78

85: [Fastened everywhere with diamond

clasps.]

Adam: All its seams were sewn with

diamonds. 79

This indicates that the garment, though the

same one, is now enhanced ( gesteigert) — the same garment, but better, enriched by earthly

merits and victory. 80

86: [And the image of the king of kings

covered the whole thing].

Klijn: embroidered and depicted in full all

over it.81

Bornkamm and Hoffmann: was painted

( aufgemalt) all over it.82

There were royal marks on it ( tzalmeh da-

malek malke). From here on, what follows is more descriptive of the veil than of the

garment, though, as has been noted, the two

follow the same pattern, according to early

Christian, Jewish, and other sources. Lines

82–99 all speak about the garment, but with

strange elaborations, including the same

concern with wrapping and embracing that

we have noted above. If the rest of the poem

is applied to the garment only, it is full of

strange anomalies, but these become

perfectly clear in terms of the well-known

veil of the temple.

88: (86 in Adam.)83 [Then he saw the whole thing begin to stir, set in motion

89: as if preparing to communicate.]

James: And again I saw that throughout it

motions of knowledge were being sent

forth, and it was ready to utter speech. 84

Klijn: And I saw also that all over it the

instincts of knowledge were working, and I

saw too that it was preparing to speak. 85

Adam: I looked again, that from its whole

extent the motions of (complete) knowledge

suddenly set it in motion. I saw that it was

getting ready as if to speak. 86

Bornkamm: And I further saw that all over

it the motions of (knowledge) were stirring

and that it was arranging ( anschickte) itself as if to speak. 87

Hoffmann: And I saw moreover that

everywhere thereon motions of my gnosis

stirred ( wimmeln) , and also saw that it was preparing as if to speak. 88

This is the anticipation of something

behind a curtain rather than a garment. What

can “motions of knowledge” be that are “sent

forth” from a garment?

90: [This line baffles everyone.]

James: And I heard it speak <with them that

had brought it>. 89

Adam: I detected the song of its song, which

it whispered to those who brought it. 90

Bornkamm: The sounds of its Lieder I

understood ( vernahm) , which it whispered as it (descended). 91

Hoffmann: I comprehended ( vernahm) the

sound of its melodies which it whispered

[while it was coming down]. 92

Klijn: I heard the sound of its tones which it

uttered with its —. 93

The word that Klijn has left untranslated is

mahtanah—the root ḥatna meaning to make a sign or covenant, whether a baptism,

circumcision, or marriage; it is related to the

universal Semitic (and Egyptian) root ḫtm,

meaning to seal or enclose. 94 All agree that the words were whispered ( mretma); but all the translators are puzzled by the context.

The Royal Embrace

91–92: [The words of these lines are

completely puzzling as the scholars render

them.]

93: [Translations vary.]

Hoffmann and Bornkamm: And with his

kingly motions it was all poured out to

me. 95

Klijn: And in its kingly movements it poured

itself entirely over me.96

Adam: And with his kingly motions it

reached itself out to me. 97

James: And all its royal motions rested upon

me as it grew toward the impulse of it. (And

with its kingly motions it was spreading

itself toward me). 98

Compare Alexander Moret on the pouring

out of sȝ over the prince by special gestures during the royal embrace. 99

94: [Translations vary.]

Hoffmann: And hastened in the assignment

[ lit. “upon the hand” ] of its givers, that I might take. 100

Adam: And upon the hand of its bringer

[presenter] it hastened, that I might take it. 101

James: And it hastened, reaching out from

the hand of <him that brought it> unto him

that would receive it.102

Klijn: And on the hands of its givers it

hastened that I might take it. 103

Bornkamm: And on the hand of its

transmitter ( Überbringer) it hastened, that I might take it. 104

95: [Translations vary.]

Hoffmann: And also my love to go and

meet it pierced (pricked, stachelte) me. 105

James and Adam: And me also did yearning

arouse to start forth and meet it and receive

it. 106

Klijn: And love urged me to run to meet it

and receive it.107

Bornkamm: And my love also spurred me

to run to meet it and receive it. 108

96: And I stretched out and received it,

adorned myself with the beauty of its colors,

97: and wrapped myself completely in my

shining mantle.

James: And I stretched forth and received it,

and adorned myself with the beauty of the

colours thereof and in my royal robe

excelling in beauty I arrayed myself

wholly. 109

Adam: And I reached out before me and

received it; with the beauty of its colors I

decked myself. And my toga of brilliant

colors I wrapped around me in its full

breadth. 110

Klijn: And I stretched forth and took it.

With the beauty of its colors I adorned

myself, and I wrapped myself wholly in my

toga of brilliant hues.111

Bornkamm: And my brilliant colored toga I

pulled (completely) over me entirely. 112

Compare the appearing in full regalia at

the time of the royal embrace in the Book of

Breathings.113 Here clothing, wrapping, and ritual embrace are again identified.

98: [Translations vary.]

Hoffmann and Bornkamm: I clothed myself

with it and mounted on up to the gate

(court) of greeting and worship [doing

reverence].114

James: And when I had put it on, I was

lifted up unto the place of peace (salutation)

and homage. 115

Adam: to the gate of salutation and giving

honor ( Begrüssung und Ehrerweisung). 116

Klijn: I clothed myself with it, and went up

to the gate. 117

99: [Translations vary.]

James: I bowed my head and prayed to

(worshipped) the glory of the Father which

had been sent (or sent it) to me. 118

Adam: I bowed my head and gave honor to

the Lichtglanz which my Father had sent to meet me. 119

Klijn: I bowed my head and worshipped the majesty of my Father who sent me. 120

Bornkamm: and worshipped the brightness

( Glanz) of my Father (who) to me had sent

it (the garment). 121

Note that one says it was the brightness

which was sent, another the speaker who

was sent, the third the garment which was

sent by the Father. So uncertain are the

experts as to the significance of these lines.

100: [Translations vary.]

Hoffmann: Whose commandments I had

fulfilled while he on his part has done what

he had promised. 122

James: For I had performed his

commandments, and he likewise that which

he had promised. 123

Adam, Klijn, and Bornkamm: Because I

had carried out his orders, and he too had

done as he promised. 124

101: [Translations vary.]

Hoffmann: At the gate (or court) of his

princes ( lit. sons of his house), I mingled with the great ones.125

James: And at the doors of his palace which

was from the beginning I mingled among

<his nobles>. 126

Adam: And at the gate of his satraps I

mingled with his mighty ones. 127

Klijn: And at the gate of his — I mingled

with his princes. 128

Bornkamm: At the gate of his satraps I

mingled among his great ones. 129

102: [Translations vary.]

Hoffmann: (He) who received me joyfully,

and I was with him in his kingdom. 130

James: And he rejoiced over me and

received me with him into his palace. 131

Adam and Klijn: And he rejoiced over me

and received me, and I was with him in his

kingdom. 132

Bornkamm: For he rejoiced over me and received me, and I was with him in his

kingdom. 133

103–5: [These lines promise a second

appearance before a king, which

Bornkamm suggests in a later addition,

adapting the story to suit the biography of

the religious leader Mani.134 Each interpreter gives a different picture.]

Parallels in the Manichaean

Kephalaia

There are many early parallels to the story

of The Pearl, which follows the pattern of the Book of Breathings quite closely. An

interesting variation is found in the

Manichaean Kephalaia, where the departure from the hero’s heavenly home is

accomplished by the same rites of embracing

as mark the return in The Pearl:135

13–17: The first five ordinances of the peace (greeting) which the gods and angels in the

land of light [the east in The Pearl] gave to the first man at the time when he wanted

to go forth against the enemy. The gods and

the angels escorted him and gave him

peace and their power ( poujin) and their

blessing and their best wishes ( noutchro,

wishes for victory, success).

What follows from the Kephalaia plainly

refers to definite ordinances:

17–19: This is the first (greeting of) peace

which the gods and angels gave to the first

man as he departed from the aeon of light.

20–21: [the second token]. The first of the

right hand ( t-šarp n-ounem) is that which

the Mother of Life gave to the first man as

he went forth to the contest.

22–24: The first embrace ( aspasmos) is that which the Mother of Life gave to the first

man as he separated himself from her in order to come down to earth to the testing

( agōn).

24–25: Also all the gods and angels

embraced him on that occasion.

26–29: Also all who were to be of the

church … embraced ( aspazein) him with

love.

30: The first honoring ( nouošt, good wish) is that which Adam received when he left for

the abyss below; he bowed the knee,

worshipping the God of Truth and of all

the aeons of light.

Notes

1. See appendix 4 below.

2. Cited in Gunther Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” in Neutestamentliche Apokryphen in deutscher

Übersetzung, ed. and trans. Edgar Hennecke and Wilhelm Schneemelcher, 3rd ed. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1959–

64), 2:304; English translation in New Testament Apocrypha, ed. Robert M. Wilson, trans. J. B. Higgins et al. (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1963–65), 2:435.

3. Alfred Adam, Die Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied als Zeugnisse vorchristlicher Gnosis (Berlin: Töpelmann, 1959), 59.

4. Gustav Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,”

Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 4

(1903): 273–83.

5. Albertus F. J. Klijn, ed., The Acts of Thomas (Leiden: Brill, 1962), 120–25.

6. Montague R. James, trans. and ed., The Apocryphal New Testament, corrected ed. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1953), 411–15.

7. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 120.

8. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 81.

9. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:304; English trans., 2:434–

35.

10. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 69.

11. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 69.

12. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:303; cf. English trans., 2:434.

13. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 120.

14. So Adam and Bornkamm. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 49; Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,”

2:349; cf. English trans., 2:498.

15. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Treasures in the Heavens: Some Early Christian Insights into the Organizing of Worlds,”

Dialogue 8/3–4 (1973): 78–98, reprinted in Old Testament and Related Studies, CWHN 1:171–214.

16. For more on the Stone of Truth, see above, commentary

to line 16, pp. 190–202.

17. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 286.

18. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 285–86.

19. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 120.

20. Hugh W. Nibley, “Strange Ships and Shining Stones (A Not So Fantastic Story),” in A Book of Mormon

Treasury (Salt Lake: Bookcraft, 1959), 144–51, reprinted in An Approach to the Book of Mormon, CWHN

6:351–58.

21. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 284.

22. Nibley, “Treasures in the Heavens,” 79, reprinted in Old Testament and Related Studies, CWHN 1:177–78.

23. 2 Baruch 54:13, in APOT, 2:511; in OTP, 1:640; Mark Lidzbarski, Ginzā: Der Schatz oder das grosse Buch der Mandäer (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1925), 279–82; David Winston, “The Iranian Component in the Bible, Apocrypha, and Qumran: A Review of the

Evidence,” History of Religions 5 (1966): 212.

24. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:349.

25. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 66.

26. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 284–85.

27. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 286, citing Pistis Sophia; see appendix 4.

28. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 50; Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:350; cf. English trans., 2:499.

29. For more on the Tale of Setne, see above, commentary to line 37.

30. Erik Hornung, Der Eine und die Vielen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971), 172–73; English translation, Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many, trans. John Baines (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1982), 178–79.

31. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 286.

32. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 69; Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 283.

33. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 286.

34. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 283.

35. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 290.

36. Cf. the Arabic maidan as “the field of this world,” in Meir Fraenkel, “Zur Deutung von Medina ‘Bezirk,

Staat,’ ” Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 77 (1965): 215; cf. Matthew 13:38; 1

Nephi 8:20; Hugh W. Nibley, “Into the Desert,” in Lehi in the Desert, The World of the Jaredites, There Were Jaredites, CWHN 5:44–45.

37. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 290, 292.

38. Zohar, Lech Lecha, 80a–84a, in The Zohar, trans.

Harry Sperling and Maurice Simon (London: Soncino, 1984), 1:270–80.

39. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 64.

40. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 64.

41. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 287.

42. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 275.

43. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 50.

44. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:350.

45. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 275 n. 2; cf. 291.

46. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 287.

47. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 287.

48. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 284.

49. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 286–87.

50. Zohar, Shemoth, 12b, in The Zohar, trans. Harry Sperling, Maurice Simon, Paul P. Levertoff (London: Soncino, 1984), 3:37.

51. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 413.

52. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 277 n. 6.

53. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 122.

54. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 51–

52.

55. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:351; cf. English trans., 2:500–501.

56. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:303; cf. English trans., 2:434.

57. Apocryphon of John II, 23, 25–31=IV, 36, 20–28=III, 30, 14–21, in NHLE (1977), 111; (1988), 118; Bentley Layton, The Gnostic Scriptures (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1987), 46.

58. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 69.

59. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:304; English trans., 2:435.

60. For more on light, see above, “The Temple as a Powerhouse,” in commentary 3, pp. 264–76.

61. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 279.

62. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:352.

63. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 52.

64. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 414.

65. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 123.

66. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 279.

67. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 124, emphasis added.

68. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 53, emphasis added.

69. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:352; cf. English trans., 2:502; also Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der

Thomasakten,” 124.

70. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 414.

71. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 53.

72. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 124.

73. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 280.

74. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:352; cf. English trans., 2:502.

75. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 414.

76. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 281; Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 53; Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; cf. English trans., 2:502.

77. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 124.

78. See Carl Brockelmann, Lexicon Syriacum (Halle: Niemeyer, 1928), 832.

79. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 53.

80. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 286.

81. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 124.

82. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353, cf. English trans.,

2:503; Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,”

281.

83. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 53; Adam’s numbering is altered throughout the latter part of the poem.

84. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 414.

85. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 124.

86. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 53.

87. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; English trans., 2:503.

88. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 281.

89. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 414.

90. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 54.

91. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; cf. English trans., 2:503.

92. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 281.

93. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 125.

94. Brockelmann, Lexicon Syriacum, 264.

95. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 281; Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; English trans., 2:503.

96. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 125.

97. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 54.

98. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 414.

99. Alexandre Moret, Du caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 47; Alexandre Moret, Le rituel du culte divin journalier en égypte (Paris: Leroux, 1902), 23, 64, 99–100.

100. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 282.

101. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 54.

102. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 415.

103. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 125.

104. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; English trans., 2:503.

105. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 282.

106. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 415; Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 54.

107. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 125.

108. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; cf. English trans., 2:503.

109. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 415.

110. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 54.

111. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 125.

112. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; cf. English trans., 2:503.

113. For more on the ceremonial regalia, see above, commentary to lines 54–55, pp. 354–55.

114. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 282; Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; cf. English trans., 2:503.

115. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 415.

116. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 54.

117. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 125.

118. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 415.

119. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 54.

120. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 125.

121. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; cf. English trans., 2:503.

122. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 282.

123. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 415.

124. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 54; Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 125; Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,”

2:353; cf. English trans., 2:503.

125. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 282.

126. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 415.

127. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 54.

128. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 125.

129. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; English trans., 2:503.

130. Hoffmann, “Zwei Hymnen der Thomasakten,” 282.

131. James, Apocryphal New Testament, 415.

132. Adam, Psalmen des Thomas und das Perlenlied, 54; Klijn, Acts of Thomas, 125.

133. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:353; English trans., 2:503.

134. Bornkamm, “Thomasakten,” 2:305; English trans., 2:436.

135. Kephalaia, chapter 9, p. 38, lines 13–33, in Carl Schmidt, Kephalaia (Berlin Manichaean Manuscript), (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1935), 1:38.

Appendix 4

From the Pistis Sophia

Nature of the Text

Though the Odes of Solomon come from

the land of the Tigris, five of those odes are

incorporated in the Pistis Sophia, an early Coptic writing from faraway Thebes in

Upper Egypt.1 In between these distant but related outposts emerge early Judeo-Christian texts in various languages, all

conveying a common message and looking to

a common home—Jerusalem, via the

sectarian settlements of the Judean desert.2

The Pistis Sophia is a third-century

Christian work from Egypt, written in the

Coptic dialect of Thebes, where our own

Book of Breathings—a near contemporary—

was found. 3 The opening statement, that Jesus taught these things to his disciples

“after he had risen from the dead” and that

they extended to “the first degree ( topos,

phase, step) of the ordinances ( em-

mystērion)”—namely, “what is within the

veil” ( et-p-houn em-p-katapetasma)4—puts the writing in the category of the Forty-Day

literature, the higher teachings given by the

Lord to the apostles in secret after his

resurrection, many of which writings were

hidden up by the ancient Christian

communities and have come to light only in

our own day.5 While the close association of the Pistis Sophia with the Odes of Solomon and Psalms of Solomon ties it also to the

Dead Sea Scrolls, it is of further significance

in the present situation and of special interest

to the student of Egyptian religion since it

preserves in the Christian milieu many of the

basic concepts of ancient Egyptian religion

and much of its imagery. 6 Thus it is the nearest thing to a direct link between Joseph

Smith Papyri XI and X and early Christianity

in Egypt and hence, less directly, to all the

sources contained in our appendixes. If the

Pistis Sophia is a “gnostic” aberration, its contradictions and perplexities nonetheless

furnish valuable clues to the genuine article

that it was trying to dissemble.

The numbers preceding each quotation in

the text that follows indicate pages in Carl

Schmidt’s edition, 7 which closely matches the pagination of the principal manuscript,

the Askew Codex. The Pistis Sophia is of

great length and contains much repetition,

both of single items and of series of

episodes. Hence, our presentation requires

excerpting and does not follow the order of

the book.

Purpose of the Writings

page 246. The ordinances (mysteries) of the three dispensations ( lit. inheritances, en-klēros) of light become ever more

numerous; you can find them in the two

great books of Jeu,

349. [which are taken from the writings

which] Enoch wrote … and hid up in the

rock of Ararad.

346. For this purpose I (Jesus) have brought

the key of the mysteries of the heavens,

without which no flesh on earth could be

saved, since without an ordinance

( mystērion) no one, whether righteous or

unrighteous, shall enter into the kingdom of

light. Wherefore, I have in this wise

brought the keys of the mysteries to earth

that I might deliver those sinners who shall

believe on me and obey me, that I might

deliver them from the bonds and seals of

the rulers (of this world) and bind them in

the sealings and garments and degrees of

light.

314–15. Proclaim it to the entire world: …

Strive to receive the mysteries of the light

in this time of tribulation, so that you might

enter into the kingdom of light. … For

when the number of those who receive

initiation ( lit. the teleioi) is completed, I will shut the doors of light and no one will

enter from that time on.

234–35. All who receive the mystery of the

kingdom of light shall go individually to

receive that inheritance which

corresponds to the degree to which one

has attained (received) in the world. …

He who accepts less will inherit the lesser

mystery, and he who receives the higher

mystery will inherit a higher place

( topos) . And everyone will remain in his place … and have authority over those

orders ( taxis) that are below him, but not over the degrees that are above him.

203–4. [States the same in different words:]

They who receive ordinances of the minor

mysteries will find themselves in a minor

degree (of glory, taxis); in a word, each

one will remain in that taxis of inheritance of light which corresponds to (the share

of) the mystery (ordinance) he has

received.

350–51. Before I [Jesus] came into the

world, no soul entered into the light. . . . I

have opened the gates … and the ways that

lead to the light. Now, therefore, whoever

is worthy, … let him receive the mysteries

and enter into the light. As for Abraham,

Isaac, and Jacob, I have forgiven them all

their sins and shortcomings and given them

the mysteries.

322–24. [Mary asks:] My Lord, if a good

man who has carried out all the ordinances

has an unrighteous (male) relative … who

has died, … what can we do to deliver

him from the punishment of the dragon of outer darkness … so that he can find the

mysteries of the kingdom of light? … The

Savior answered Mary, saying, …

Perform these same ordinances of the

Unutterable One for him, saying, … The

soul ( psychē) of the man So-and-so of

whom I am thinking in my mind ( hēt) … if

it has completed the number of cycles of

change (cf. Egyptian ḫpr.w), may it be led to the virgin of light … to seal him with

the seal of the Ineffable. … [Then the dead

will be baptized] and receive the seal and

the sign ( maïn) of the kingdom … and be

taken to the degree ( taxis) of the light.

350–51. Now therefore, let everyone who is

worthy receive the ordinances (mysteries)

and enter into the light

277. that mankind may not die the death

appointed for them by the forces ( en-

archōn) of natural law ( himarmenē) .

314. [Christ’s message to the world:] Seek constantly and do not give up until you

have found the mysteries of the light!

280. Every man who comes to you [the

apostles] believing and … worthy, give

them the mysteries of the light and conceal

them not. And give the higher mysteries to

whoever is worthy of them and the lower

mysteries to whoever is worthy of them.

[Each should receive to the limit of his

capacity.]

372. But hide this ordinance [of sacrifice], and do not give it to everybody, but only to

him who shall do everything which I told

you by way of commandment.

273. [If you have given the mysteries] to

those who are unworthy and who have

deceived you and use the mysteries for

their own purposes ( lit. make a paradigm of them; can also mean use them to

impress others), … you shall say, …

return the mystery to us, and let them become aliens to the mystery of the

kingdom forever. [The whole passage

indicates the manner in which the

ordinances

became

widespread

and

corrupted throughout the world.]

Purification Rites

347–48. [Baptism comes first among the

ordinances.] I have said to all men that

they are to seek after the mysteries of the

kingdom of light, which shall cleanse them

and make them wholly pure ( hilikrines)

and bring them into the light. For that

reason John the Baptist prophesied

concerning me, knowing that I would bring

the mysteries into the world to cleanse

sinners … and bring them to the light.

123–24. He who has baptized has forgiven

the human race and transformed (made)

them in the peace of the Sons of Light.

298–99. To him who receives the mysteries of baptisms, those ordinances become as a

mighty fire … , consuming sins [and by

purging making strict separation between

all that is false— atimimon, mere pretense

—and all that is good and true].

197–98. [In time] all who have repented will

come to the middle place [ i.e., this world, the transition between premortal and

postmortal existence], and those who are

in the middle will baptize them and give

them the spiritual anointing and seal them

with the seals of their ordinances

(mysteries), and they shall pass through all

the stations ( topo s, degrees) of the middle

… , receiving from each the seal of its

mystery and remaining at each level

( topos) of ordinances until one finally

reaches the inheritance of light.

290–91. [At each level ( topos) the soul is examined and tested.] They will all test

( dokimaze) that soul to find their signs (or tokens, maein) in it, as well as their seals and their baptisms and their anointing

( chrisma) . And the virgin of the light will seal

that

soul,

and

the

workers

( paralēmptēs) will baptize it and give it the spiritual anointing. … And then the

receptionists (workers) hand it over to the

great Sabaōth … at the gate of life …

[and] call Father. And to him the soul

(fem.) gives … his seals and his

responses, … with the seal of each degree

( topos) in the right hand [this is the proper meaning of the word ounam]; and the soul

will give its knowledge ( epistēmē;

special knowledge) and with the righthand

seal of every topos with hymns of glory,

… and all the assistants ( paralēmptōr) of Melchizedek will seal that soul and lead it

to the treasury of the light, … the topos of its inheritance.

The Creation of Man

136. The [creative] word which it [Wisdom]

spoke is the outflowing of light which

came ( lit. drew) together at the temple.

[The personification of Wisdom, Sophia,

is biblical as well as Egyptian (Maat).

Thus Proverbs 7:4; 8:1; Matthew 11:19;

Luke 7:35; 11:49; for wisdom specifically

as an agent of the creation, see Jeremiah

51:15; Proverbs 3:19.]

130–31. It was Michael and Gabriel who

took charge, bringing the outpouring of

light into disorganized matter ( chaos); …

they were entrusted with the distribution

( apohroia) of the light, which I handed

over to them to be applied to (introduced

into) chaos.

133. The outpouring of light entered into

chaos and suffused itself over all the realm

of blind chance (the authades, that which is under no control but its own nature, the

“self-willed”). And also the word of thy power uttered through Solomon: It has

drawn all things and brought them together

at the temple. … And again: … The

emanations of blind chance (the authades,

who acknowledges no law) could not

dominate over ( amahte, contain, control)

the outpouring of light within the confines

( sobet) of the darkness of chaos.

35. [After the sun’s light has been purified,]

leftover matter is brought down to this

lower sphere and fashioned into men and

likewise into the souls of creeping things,

and cattle and wild animals and birds …

all being sent down to this world of man,

where they become souls.

129–30. I [Christ] called upon Gabriel from

the midst of the worlds ( aeons) along with Michael, pursuant to the command of my

Father, … and I gave to them the task of

the outpouring of the light and caused them

to go down into matter unorganized ( chaos) and assist Pistis Sophia. … And

as soon as the flow of light entered the

chaos, it became brighter and brighter,

suffusing all chaos, and spread out and

occupied every part ( topos) of it. … Then

Michael and Gabriel introduced the stream

of light into the inert matter ( hylē) of the body of Pistis Sophia, pouring back into

her the light powers which had been taken

from her; and all her physical body

became full of light, … the light having

been given to them by me. And Michael

and Gabriel, who are charged with

administering the light, they who introduce

light into chaos, will also give the

ordinances of the light to them [the

initiates?].

129–30, 133–36. [It is Michael and Gabriel

who pass between heaven and earth from

time to time in their assignment of

organizing the world out of chaos.]

65. Now, this is the mystery which was the

type for every race which was about to

come into existence, that that race at its

creation should sing a hymn to the Most

High ( or e-p-jise, on high). Because light has looked down from his light on high,

and he shall look upon all that matter

which is below. [In the lines that follow,

the sending down of light at the creation is

compared with the visitation of the Lord to

those who sat in darkness in the

descensus:]

69–70. Wilt thou not send light into chaos

from thy realms, and will not deliverers

come … down into the darkness at thy

command? Will they not declare the

mystery of thy name in chaos? Let thy light

come to me here!

52. [In common] with those who carry out

the mysteries in his name,

51. spirit ( psychē) and matter praise the Lord [in a hymn of creation]. Now

therefore let all material substance

rejoice! Seek ye after the light that you

might live. … For the light has hearkened

to substance and will not leave any matter

unpurified; let living souls (Coptic

psychooue < Greek psychē) and matter ( hylē) together praise the Lord of all the worlds, along with matter and whatever

comprises it.

34. [The one who directs all such operations

between worlds is] Melchizedek, the great

transmitter ( paralēmptōr) of the light; he was wont to come into the midst of all the

worlds ( en-en-aiōn) and the rulers ( en-archōn), who are bound … by the laws of

chance; … he would remove what was

disturbing them and set in motion the

driving force ( spoudastēs) controlling

them, causing them to accelerate their

revolutions ( kyklos, cycles).

333–34. The refuse ( sorem, i.e., of other worlds) that is left over after a

purification by light is taken by

Melchizedek, and the five great forces

( archons) of nature ( himarmenē) rework ( lit. knead, ouošem) that refuse among themselves and then portion it out to

various individual souls, so that every one

of the rulers of the worlds contributes

something to each separate soul—that is

why they process (knead) it mutually

among themselves.

341–45. [The creation of man is the type

both of his birth and his resurrection. Thus

365 assistants or ministers (the complete

cycle of the year) seal the parts of the

body together in the womb, the operation

taking exactly seventy days—the period of

the Egyptian embalming bath. Each part of

the body is touched as it is completed, in

the manner of the Opening of the Mouth.]

335. And that new power (the new body) is

exactly like ( homoiōs) the appearance of

the spirit ( psychē), resembling it in every particular.

332–34. When an ancient ( i.e., preexistent) spirit ( ou-psychē en-archaion) is about to come down to that region which they call

the kingdom of Adam [to take an earthly

body], … that archon who is at the head of

the place gives that preexistent soul a cup

of forgetfulness, if it is an ancient spirit;

then the head of the aeons himself

[Melchizedek] mixes the cup of forgetting

[so that everything on this earth seems

strange and counterfeit].

374. And then … the Adamas comes, who

hands the cup of forgetting to souls,

bringing a cup filled with the water of

forgetfulness and giving it to the soul,

which drinks and forthwith forgets every

place and every realm ( topos) in which it has ever been. And they cast it down into a

body to spend a period of time in constant

travail (or trial, testing), and tribulation of

heart.

The Garden and the Fall

Since this book is primarily a revelation to

Mary and her female friends, the feminine

figure of Pistis Sophia (Egyptian Maat)—

who is fides quaerens intellectum, the

searcher after knowledge—dominates, taking

the role of Eve. It will be recalled that even

in the biblical story of the garden, Eve plays

a more active role than Adam, being the first

to acquire earthly knowledge ( sophia). In the Life of Adam and Eve, it is Eve who tells the story of the fall, speaking in the first person.

42–44. I entered into the thirteenth aeon and

found Pistis Sophia, … and she was alone;

not one of them being with her, she sat in

that place in sorrow and anguish [the fall].

[In her desire for knowledge, she looked

behind the veil before she was ready and

so was cast out into outer darkness where

she was at the mercy of all the primal

forces of chaos.]

47. And I went and there [she says] I was in

the darkness of the chaos beneath, and I

could not escape, … being beset by all the

forces (emanations) of the natural law

( authades); and the power of the lion-

faced one took all my power from me. [In

Egyptian imagery as in early Christian, the

unharnessed and untamed forces of the

universe are often depicted as a raging

lion.]

63. My light they have taken from me, and

my power has withered, and I have

forgotten my mystery which formerly I

used to perform.

45–84. [In her distress she cries out—the

penitential Psalms—to Jesus, who comes to her rescue.]

98. O light, in whom I have believed from

the beginning, … help me! And in that very

hour her repentance was accepted, and the

first mystery hearkened to her, and I was

sent forth by his order and came down to

help her and brought her up out of chaos

since she had repented.

139. Then, at the command of my Father, I

sent Gabriel and Michael forth again … to

help Pistis Sophia. And I instructed both

Gabriel and Michael to carry out Pistis

Sophia on their hands, … and I also

instructed them to guide her through the

regions of chaos out of which they were to

bring her,

208–11. [and was accordingly under

obligation to study the highest mysteries,

since only by receiving such in this world

can one comprehend the meaning and

purposes of God’s plan for the eternities, including the meaning of evil and the

principle of opposition in all things

(which the woman was first to

comprehend). The mysteries answer all

the fundamental questions.]

194–95. Jesus … and Melchizedek, the two

great guides (leaders, presiding rulers,

prohēgoumenos), have issued forth from

the pure and perfect (unmixed) light of the

first tree, and so to the fifth. Jeu (Jesus),

the supreme overseer ( episkopos) of the

light, comes forth first, from the pure light

of the first tree, while he who stands guard

at the veil of the right hand has come forth

from the second tree [the enigmatic

sections on trees at least establish a

garden setting].

311. [Mary explains the mysteries of the

ordinances carried out on behalf of the

woman in terms of the fig tree, that being

the tree of life, which turned barren at the fall (cf. Luke 13:6–9)].

137–38. [The fallen Sophia is sorely

afflicted by the great serpent taking the

reptilian forms of seven-headed serpent

and dragon and]

354–56. [the Ouroboros of the solar disk. It was he who was cast out of heaven.]

The Road Back

Being cast out, man leads a life that is

neither paradise nor hell, but “the condition

of in-between”— hiooue en-t-mēte—where

one is exposed to constant dangers and

pains.

357–58. Mary asked, … My Lord, make

known to us the advantage of the ways of

the middle, for we have heard from thee

that they lie through great tribulations

( kolasis, punishments); how, my Lord,

will we ever escape from them? … or just

how long is their punishment?

308 [cf. 86–88, 91]. [They who reject the

mysteries] and leave their bodies without

having repented … must dwell in the midst

of the mouth of the dragon of outer

darkness, to perish without trace ( haliske) and be as if they did not exist—forever

[they will cease to progress].

306. From that time on they will not be

worthy to return to the use ( metabolē) of

bodies or of anything else, but are cast into

outer darkness.

45–84. [But there is a way out. Repentance

comes first—Pistis Sophia’s penitential

psalms are the beginning of the process.]

163–64. [Jesus teaches them to the disciples.

The delivering ordinances are the gate

which Christ opens to all; ]

350–51. [before his coming no soul had such

an escape route:] But when I came I

opened the gates ( em-pylē) of light and

opened the way to the light. Now therefore, whoever is worthy, let him

receive the mysteries and enter into the

light.

87. All the relentless powers encircled me,

saying they would take away every bit of

my light. But I turned to thee, … saying,

Thou art my Savior. … Save me out of the

hands of the authades; … place thy light

upon me.

328. Savior, have mercy that none of our

kindred dead should come to such a state

[Mary speaking] and condition; have

mercy on all souls that shall be in such a

condition, for thou art the key which opens

the door of all things ( em-p-tēref, the

universe) and shuts the door of all, and thy

mystery embraces them all.

323–25. [When the work of baptism and

sealing is being done,] during which you

shall say, The soul of So-and-so of whom I

am thinking in my mind, the dragon will take its tail out of his mouth and release

that spirit from its embrace … and the

ministers (agents) of Melchizedek will

snatch it away from the dragon or from the

archons out of whatever place it is in.

350–51. Now therefore, let everyone who is

worthy receive the ordinances and enter

into the light.

316. [For many] souls will knock at the gates

of light and say, Lord, open unto us! And I

will answer: I do not know you. … But

they shall say, We have received your

mysteries and carried out your

instructions. … But I will answer: I do not

know you because you are workers of

iniquity [the ordinances do not save

automatically]. … Therefore, announce to

the whole world to repent and leave the

world and all the material things in it, and

receive the ordinances of the light before

the set number of initiated ( teleios, perfect) souls is completed. …

196–98. [They who are still in this place of

testing, in the condition of “in between”

( en-t-mēte), should perform the

ordinances for those dead who did not

have the opportunity in life, baptizing them

and] giving them the spiritual anointing

and sealing them with the seals of their

mysteries, so that they can pass through

every level ( topos), passing by the nine

guards (watchmen), … each of whom

gives them his seal so that they can pass on

to the next.

276–77. [Workers for the dead must labor to

see to it that they are passed on from order

to order with the slightest possible delay]

so that … they can go on higher and higher

in the inheritance of the kingdom of light.

169. [The way back leads through twelve

aeons; when the Lord descends to deliver

Pistis Sophia, then] the gate is opened; those who are in all the aeons will know it

because of the great light that will pervade

all their regions. [The imagery is

Egyptian.]

317–20. [Jesus to Mary]: The outer darkness

is a great dragon with his tail in his mouth

[the Egyptian Ouroboros], he being

outside the entire cosmos and containing

within himself a multitude of regions

( topos) of punishment—namely, the

twelve great ( našt) prisons ( tamion) of punishment, each having its archon, each

with a different face. [Here the description

becomes frankly Egyptian, the faces being

those of crocodile, cat, dog, serpent, bull,

pig, bear, vulture, etc.] Each one has a

special name for each hour, and each one

changes his face every hour. [The watcher

of each of the twelve gates is in turn

supervised by watching angels, more than

one figure standing at each gate or door.]

[Exactly as in the Egyptian texts, the doors

have names, which the initiate must give in

order to pass].

265 and passim: [One proceeds on the way

from one station ( chōrēma, from chōreō) to the next by producing answers,

explanations, symbols, tokens ( psēphos),

and seals ( sphragis).]

330. [A given cycle ( kyklos) in the changes of the body has not been completed until

the appropriate ordinances have been

performed—the concept is that of the

Egyptian ḫprw. ]

126. These are the names as I give them

[writes the scribe]. … They should be

written in code ( lit. in a symbol, hen ou-maïn) that the Sons of God [code name for

the early Christian community] may

communicate ( lit. reveal) them up to a

point (up to this place). The name of the

Immortal One [common Hebrew

expression for God] is written aaa www

[with three alphas and three omegas]. The

voice [that sets all things in motion] … is

iii, etc.

78. [Even the psychostasy comes into the

picture.] God shall sit in the council ( lit.

synagogue) of the gods and judge the gods

(cf. Psalms 81:1).

256–59. [A long Negative Confession is set

forth in the Egyptian manner.]

94. [The usual turning of the tables against

one’s accusers:] May darkness overcome

those who wanted to take away my light

and my power.

361. [The image of the balance is introduced

in Bubastis, definitely a Book of the Dead

setting:] and when she comes to the

seventh house of the sphere (house of the

zodiac), that is the balance (libra); then the

veil is drawn between the right hand and

the left hand, and the Great Sabaōth the Good looks out in the height with ( hen) the right hand. [The guilty is seized by the

monster Paraplex, the Egyptian Amentit of

the pyschostasy scenes.]

278. [Here the arrested sacrifice is

indicated.] He who performs that mystery

and carries out all the prescribed forms

( nef-schēma) and figures thereof ( nef-

typos), and its steps ( jin-aheratou), will not really come out of the body in doing

so; yet when he dies, he will not have to

go through it all again—the responses and

explanations and tokens—on the other

side. [Christ has provided the ordinances]

that men need not die the death appointed

for them by the rulers of fate [ i.e., in the course of nature].

246–47. [It is done figuratively, on a certain

level ( chōrēma); ] these things are only types and figures ( schēma) .

Culminating Ordinances

290–91. [At every station, inspectors] prove

the soul and find together their signs in it,

and their seals and their baptisms, and

their anointing [whereupon they put their

seal on the soul and send it forward to the

next inspection point. This goes on to the

highest levels]. The assistants of the light

hand over the soul to the Great Sabaōth the

Good, who is at the gate of life … who is

called Father, … who gives the soul his

seals … and Melchizedek seals that soul

and all the assistants of Melchizedek seal

that soul and lead it into the treasury of

light [where it is again sealed, and so]

goes over into the realm of its inheritance.

240. [When one receives the mystery by

proxy,] he will not be judged, … but we

will hand him on quickly from one to

another, from order to order ( topos) until he reaches the virgin of light [Egyptian

Maat], … who sees the signs and tokens in him, but holds him back [until he has

received complete clearance and] then

seals him with the holy seal.

276. [For the dead, this can be in monthly

installments, as] every month by month the

virgin seals the candidate with a higher

seal.

196–97. [The candidate always moves in a

company of his kind; each arithmesis—set

number—of souls has its time and place

on earth, and when the number is fulfilled

or the initiation completed of teleioi

psychai, the group of souls moves on to] a higher inheritance in the light. …

Everyone must remain in the topos in

which he is … until he is ready to receive

the mysteries of the next.

350. [Only] one in ten thousand … will ever

attain to the mystery of the first mystery.

353–54. [An important episode of the group

initiation is the prayer circle, which we have treated elsewhere.]8

190–91. [There are mysteries far beyond any

known on earth.]

189. When I lead you to the topos of those who have received their inheritance … the

sun will look like nothing but a tiny speck

of cornmeal because of the enormous

distance and because the new world is so

much greater.

218–19. [These higher mysteries are not for

the unqualified, who are terrified of them;

they go far beyond mortal comprehension.]

276–77. [As the Spirit soars into the heights,

no power is able to hold it down or even

to approach it.]

359. [The initiates become the dispensation

of the Sons of Light on earth, who receive

whatever they desire.]

370–71. [They become] the followers of the

lord [followers is an extremely common

Egyptian expression] … numbered among the kingdom of my Father.

190–91. When they of this earth become

exalted by the mysteries, they will be with

me in the topos of the light, and each of

them will be a king over his dominions

(emanations; Coptic probolooue < Greek probolai) … according to his measure of

glory.

196. Everyone according to the measure of

glory he has received will rule with me in

the inheritance of the light.

232. All who receive the ordinances will be

fellow kings with me … in my kingdom.

118–19. [The mystic embrace is prominent

in the Pistis Sophia.]

121–22. [Mary, the mother of Jesus, recounts

an episode from the childhood of Jesus:] It

was when you [Jesus] were quite small,

before the Spirit had descended upon you;

you were in the vineyard one day with

Joseph. The Spirit came down from on high and came right into the house—

looking just like you, and since I did not

know him, I thought that it was you. And

the Spirit said to me: Where is Jesus, my

brother? I want to meet him. And I was

perplexed and thought it must be a

phantom sent to test me[.] [Mary went and

got Jesus and Joseph,] and we all went

down together to the house and went in

and found the Spirit tied to your bed

[where Mary had bound him,] and he was

let loose and embraced you and kissed

you; and you also embraced him and the

two of you became one [ unio mystica].

This must then be the interpretation of the

saying [about grace and truth embracing].

124–25. Then Mary, the Mother of Jesus,

again came forth … and said … [the

saying that] grace and truth met together

refers to me—Mary, your mother—and

Elizabeth, the mother of John, with whom I met. For mercy must be the power of

Sabaōth that was in me … while truth was

the power which was in Elizabeth as John,

who proclaimed … the Way of Truth.

Furthermore, mercy ( ḥesed, grace)

meeting with truth is the meeting of you,

my Lord, with John on the day which you

received baptism.

362–64. [When the rule of evil is destroyed,

Melchizedek expects us at the veil and

invites us to proceed.]

223. [For the highest of mysteries in this

world, the first mystery,] lies beyond the

veil.

194. [There at] the veil of the great light [the

guardian—Melchizedek—waits to

introduce us to Ieou.]

23. I went up to the great aeons of the

archons and stood before their veils and

shining gates, … and their veils and their

gates were parted, that is to say, their veils were. … And I entered within the aeons,

becoming ever more shining, all about me

shining with immeasurable brightness.

315. [There is a whole series of] aeons and

veils and firmaments [cf. Moses 7:30:

“His curtains are stretched out still”],

85–86. [each representing the transition to

another world, so that, e.g., the light of the

sun must penetrate many veils and topoi

before it reaches the earth, where we see

only a dim and misleading image of its

true glory.]

41–42. [When one reaches the end of a stage

of existence— epochē—one goes up to the

veil at the thirteenth aeon, where] their

veils … parted and opened to me.

324–31. [After one has completed the tests,

the baptism, and the anointing and has

been conducted to the treasury of the light,

one ascends up a few steps to the drawing

aside of the veil and the entrance into a new purification, when the cycle begins

all over again, but at a higher level.]

194–95. [In an ever-expanding system,]

fellow kings reign … in the region of the

souls of those who have received the first

mystery of the first mystery. … They will

be kings with the first Savior of the first

voice.

15–17. And when Jesus had finished saying

these things to his disciples, he added, …

Behold, I have put on my garment, and

have been given all authority ( exousia) by virtue of ( hitem) the first mystery. Yet a little while and I will tell you all the

mysteries. … [The key to the whole thing]

is that mystery which lies beyond the

world ( et-en-bol hem-p-kosmos), for the

sake of which the universe itself exists,

ever mounting up, ever expanding ( sōr

ebol). … Come to us, for we are your

fellow members, all of us identical with yourself; we are all one and you are one

with us.

Notes

1. J. Rendel Harris, The Odes and Psalms of Solomon (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1909), 10–22.

2. See Hugh W. Nibley, Since Cumorah: The Book of Mormon in the Modern World (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1967), 69–74, reprinted as Since Cumorah, CWHN 7:61–64.

3. Carl Schmidt, ed., Pistis Sophia (Hauniae: Gyldendalske Boghandel-Nordisk, 1925), xix, xxxii–xxxiii.

4. Pistis Sophia 1.1, in ibid., 1–4; English translation in Carl Schmidt, ed., Pistis Sophia, trans. Violet MacDermot (Leiden: Brill, 1978), 1–4.

5. Hugh W. Nibley, “Evangelium Quadraginta Dierum,”

Vigiliae Christianae 20 (1966): 1–24, reprinted in When the Lights Went Out: Three Studies on the Ancient Apostasy (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), 33–54; and Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:10–

44.

6. See László Kákosy, “Selige und Verdammte in der spätägyptischen Religion,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 105–6.

7. See indicated pages of Schmidt, Pistis Sophia, for the context. Schmidt’s pagination is retained in Violet

MacDermot’s English translation. [Nibley’s translation appears here with minor editorial changes, including in punctuation and capitalization—eds.]

8. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Early Christian Prayer Circle,”

BYU Studies 19/1 (1978): 41–78, reprinted in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:45–99.

Appendix 5

Cyril of Jerusalem’s Lectures on

the Ordinances

Nature of the Text

Cyril of Jerusalem (d. A.D. 386)

delivered his Five Explanatory Lectures to

the Newly Enlightened (i.e., newly baptized or initiated) at Easter time in Jerusalem in

A.D. 347, 348, or 350, before he had

become a bishop. The lectures are entitled

Mystagogikai Katecheseis, or “Instructions to Initiates into the Mysteries.” In a recent

and rather sensational work, Morton Smith

demonstrates at length that the word mystery,

as used by the first Christians, usually refers

to ordinances. He duly notes that Judaism

itself was an ancient “mystery religion” in

which the rites of circumcision and passover were “mysteries,” 1 and that such early and orthodox Christian writers as Clement of

Alexandria “think of Jesus as a ‘hierophant,’

a teacher of mysteries.” 2 As Smith sums it up, “This was the mystery of the kingdom—

the mystery rite by which the kingdom was

entered,” i.e., the ordinances of initiation. 3

The teaching was very secret and limited to

an “inner circle,” 4 which may explain why the closest parallels to it are found not in the

Old Testament or in Palestinian Judaism, but

in the Egyptian magical papyri. 5

The time and place of Cyril’s lectures are

both significant since it was in the middle of

the fourth century and at Jerusalem that the

cult of the temple enjoyed a spectacular

albeit specious revival. 6 These particular lectures contain “the fullest account extant”

of ordinances in the church at that crucial

period, 7 giving unique insights into almost unknown areas of “sacramental teachings, …

sacrificial mysteries of the Eucharist, and

arcane practices.” 8 Our translation is from J.-P. Migne in Patrologia Graeca. 9

Purpose of the Writing

1.1. I have long wanted to talk with you

about these spiritual and heavenly

ordinances. But since I am well aware by

experience that seeing is far more

convincing than hearing, I have waited

until now, when you would all be in a

better condition to understand what I am

talking about as I conduct you from your

recent experience ( or test, peira) into the brighter and more fragrant meadow of this

Paradise. As a matter of fact, you are now

capable of receiving more godly

mysteries, having been deemed worthy of

the divine life-giving baptism. It is time to

set a table of more advanced (perfect) teachings, that you may better understand

the significance ( emphasin, meaning) of

what you have been through.

Purification

1.2. First you entered the annex ( proaulion

oikon, i.e., wʿb.t) of the baptistery, and as you stood facing west you heard

(instructions) and were asked to raise your

hands. Thereby you cast out Satan from

your midst ( apetattesthe) as if he were

present. Now you must understand that this

is a type of something that goes back to

very ancient times, i.e., … when Moses

led the Hebrews out of their evil servitude

to the Egyptians [it is explained that the

same waters—of the Red Sea—which

liberated the Jews destroyed their satanic

oppressors: a type of baptism].

1.3. Now turn with me from the old to the

new, from the type to the reality, … when the blood of Jesus Christ actually provides

the means of deliverance from the demons.

1.4. Hear further instruction as you raise

your hands. [He elaborates on the

renunciation of Satan.]

1.5. In this most awful hour, everything you

say is written in the books of God. You are

now bound by oath and will perjure

yourselves if you act contrary.

2.2. [Review:] Yesterday,…immediately

upon entering you removed your street

clothes. And that was the image of putting

off the old man and his works, … the

former man, corrupted as he was by the

desire for false (deceptive) things; and

may that garment, once put off, never be

put on again!

1.10. In the holy bath of rebirth, God

removes every tear from every face. There

is no more sorrow, for the old man has

been removed.

1.8. In renouncing Satan and joining with

Christ … flee to the mountain, to Jesus

Christ, to the stone cut without hands

( tmēthenta, or precious— timēthenta—

stone)…which filled the whole world (cf.

the Stone of Truth).

3.1. Upon emerging from the tank of holy

running water, you were given an

anointing, the antitype of which was the

anointing of Christ.

3.2. He was anointed with … what is called

the olive oil of exaltation ( agalliaseōs

elaiō—a coronation figure) … while you

were anointed with myrrh (scented oil),

making you companions and copartners

( koinōnoi kai metochoi) with Christ.

3.3. You were anointed on your brow and

your other sense organs, and so while the

body is anointed in outward appearance

with myrrh, the soul ( psychē) is sanctified

by the life-bestowing Holy Spirit.

3.4. First of all, you were anointed on the

brow ( metōpon, forehead and eyes, lit.

“space between the eyes”) to free you

from the shame which completely

involved the first man when he fell, and

that you might clearly perceive ( or reflect, katoptrizisthe) the glory of the Lord with wide-open mind ( lit. with uncovered

face). Then your ears that you might

receive the hearing ears of the mysteries of

God. … Next come the nostrils, that upon

receiving the holy ordinance you may say:

“We are the sweet odor of Christ to God

among the saved.” After that (you were

anointed) on the breast ( ta stēthē, “the seat of feeling [passion] and thought”), 10 that, clothed with the breastplate of

righteousness, you may stand against the

wiles of the devil [countering his evil

thoughts with good ones].

3.5. It is because you are worthy of this holy anointing ( chrismatos) that you are called Christians. … It is by following this road

that you have advanced to the point of

earning that title.

3.6. When Moses received the order to make

his brother a high priest, after washing him

with water he anointed him, and he was

called a Christ, because of the anointing

which was the type [of Christ]. Thus also

Solomon, being called to the kingship, was

anointed after a bath in Gihon by the high

priest. For them it was a type [making

them kings and priests], but for us it is not

symbolical but real, since you really have

been anointed by the Holy Ghost. The king

( archē) of your salvation is Christ, for he is the true firstfruits and you are the

unleavened bread. If the firstfruits [ i.e., the priestly office] is holy, that holiness will

be transferred to the unleavened bread

[ i.e., you too will become kings and priests].

3.4. As Christ after his baptism … went forth

to confront the adversary, so you, after

your holy baptism and mystic anointing,

were clothed in the armor of the Holy

Ghost to stand against the opposing power.

1.10. Having put off the old man’s garment of

sorrow, you now celebrate as you put on

the garment of the Lord Jesus Christ.

3.1. Having been baptized in Christ and

having put on Christ like a garment, you

come to resemble ( symmorphoi gegonate)

the Son of God.

4.8. After you put off the old garments and put on those of spiritual white, you should

keep them always thus spotless white.

That is not to say that you must always go

around in white clothes, but rather that you

should be always clothed in what is really

white and glorious, that you may say with

the blessed Isaiah (61:10), “Let my soul exult in the Lord, for he hath clothed me in

a robe of salvation and clothing of

rejoicing.” [The word here used for

“clothe” is endyō, meaning to place a garment on one, and is the ultimate source

of our word “endowment,” derived in the

Oxford English Dictionary from both

induĕre, to invest with a garment, and indūcĕre, to lead into or initiate.]11

The Creation of Man

2.1. Useful to us are the daily ordinances

( lit. initiations, mystagōgiai), as well as the newer instructions that introduce us to

unfamiliar activities ( pragmatōn) ,

especially so to you who have just been

renewed by leaving an old life for a new

one [cf. Book of Breathings, “It is useful

( ȝḫ) to him in the next life” ]. Therefore I must give you a review of yesterday’s

ordinances in sequence, so that you will understand the symbolism of what you

went through in the inner building.

2.2. You were true imitators of Adam, the

first man to be created, who was naked in

the garden and was not ashamed.

2.3. Then … you were anointed with olive

oil from the crown of your heads to your

feet ( heōs tōn katō) .

2.4. You were immersed three times,

representing symbolically Christ’s three

days in the tomb. For as the Savior was in

the bowels of the earth, … so you, … in

rising up, (came) … into the light of day, and went down into the darkness of night

when you were immersed. … And therein

you died and were born; and that water of

salvation was both tomb and mother to you

[cf. Nut als Mutter und Sarg! ( Nut as Mother and Coffin)]. You can say with Solomon: “There is a time to be born and

a time to die,” which works also in reverse: There is a time to die and a time

to be born [cf. the Egyptian “Recite-in-

reverse” formula], … since both your birth

and death took place simultaneously

( syndromes—by the same ordinance).

The Garden

1.11. All these things took place in the outer

building. God willing, when we enter the

holy of holies after having advanced in the

proper order of the initiatory ordinances

( tais hexēs mystagōgiais) , we shall there be made acquainted with the symbola of

the fully initiated.

1.9. [Meanwhile,] the testament of Satan

having been renounced, … the paradise of

God is opened to you, which was planted

eastward. … This is symbolized when you

turn yourselves from the west to face east,

the place of light.

1.4. [The candidate said] I renounce thee, deceitful serpent, working all manner of

wickedness. I renounce thee who plotted

against, and under the semblance of

friendship brought about, the fall of our

first parents!

1.7. [This because Satan offers the food of

vanity, just as Christ offers the bread and

wine of the sacrament (the meal in the

garden)].

4.7. Christ came and spread a mystic and

symbolic table … as a sharing with God.

“He anointeth my head” (Psalms 23:5)

refers to the sealing on the brow before the

meal, making one the type of the seal, the

sacred mark of God.

2.3. Having [like Adam] been cut off from

the wild olive tree, you are driven

(goaded) toward the good olive tree, that

you might become sharers in the fatness of

the true olive… . For the inhalations [cf.

snsn] of the saints ( or of holy things) and the act of calling upon the name of God [as

Adam did] act as a most mighty lamp to

scorch and drive off the demons [cf. the

Egyptian banning of the serpent from the

garden and the tree by fire].

The Way Back

1.9. The paradise of God … from which our

first parent was expelled through

transgression is now opened to you. …

The symbol of this is your turning from the

west to face the east, the place of light

[setting out on the journey].

1.10. Be alert (sober) and take advantage of

the protection these words ( logois, written or spoken instructions or formulas) afford

you. For the adversary … like a roaring

lion goes about seeking whom he might

devour [cf. Egyptian Apophis]. In times

past, death has devoured mighty men.

3.7. Keep your anointing undefiled, … for it is the holy spiritual protection

( phylaktērion) of the body and the

salvation of the soul. … Keep it by you

undefiled and blameless as you progress

on your way ( prokoptontes) through good

works, and be compliant ( euarestoi) to the guide ( or author, archēgō) of your salvation ( or safety), Christ Jesus.

3.3. [This after having put on “the armour of

righteousness” ], for a contest.

1.2. [It was in the waters that the adversary

was overcome (cf. Apophis and the

combat motif).]

5.17. Temptation is like a dangerous torrent

to cross. Those who are not overwhelmed

by temptation are those who get across,

becoming some of the best swimmers.

Others are drowned (sunk). … Thou hast

tried us, O God, thou hast tested us as

silver is tested in the fire; thou hast led us

into the trap; thou hast placed heavy burdens upon our backs.…We have come

through fire and water, and thou hast led us

to a resting place.

2.6. Let no one suppose that baptism is for

the removal of sins only; it also has the

purpose of making us sons. … It vouches

for the gift of the Holy Ghost and is

thereby a similitude ( antitypos) of the

sufferings of Christ.

1.4. [Facing the serpent, the destroyer, the

candidate can say:] I no longer fear thy

power, for Christ has broken ( kateluse) it, sharing with me his blood and flesh, that

through them death may abolish death, that

I might not be held forever in bondage.

2.2. [The candidate is not only the type of

Adam in the garden, but also “imitates”

Christ in the crucifixion,] dismantling12

earthly power and authority and openly

triumphing on the cross. Since powers of

the adversary still linger in your members, it is not yet possible for you to wear that

ancient robe. I am not speaking entirely of

tangible things, but rather of the old man

perishing amid deceptive lusts.

2.5. O strange and paradoxical thing! We did

not die in reality, nor were we really

buried, nor did we rise up after having

been actually crucified. Rather, it was

imitation ( mimēsis) by a token ( eikoni) , while the salvation part is the real thing.

Christ was really crucified, really was

buried, and really rose again, and all that for our benefit, so that by sharing his

sufferings in imitation we might attain to a

real salvation. O love of men overflowing!

Christ really received the nails in his

blameless hands and feet and suffered

pain; while I, without any pain or struggle,

by his sharing of suffering the pain, enjoy the fruits of salvation!

Petition for Admission

2.1. I put before you yesterday’s ordinances

of initiation in their proper order, so that

you may learn which tokens ( symbola)

must be given by you in the inner temple

( oikos, house, the Jerusalem word for

temple).

5.2. [The penultimate rite is a prayer circle.]

Now you see the deacon ( diakonon,

assistant) providing wash things for the

priest and the elders ( presbyterois) all

standing in a circle around the altar. It is

not for washing off physical dirt—that is

not it at all; … but it is symbolic of the

purity from all sin and unrighteousness

which we must have.

5.3. Then the assistant cries out: Exchange

signs with each other ( allēlous apolabete) and let us embrace! You must not suppose

that this is the usual hug and kiss

( philēma) of common friends in the

marketplace. It is not such a sign of affection ( philēma)… . The embrace

( philēma, kiss) is, in fact, the sign of a mingling of souls and the erasing of all ill

feeling. Wherefore, Christ said, “If … thy

brother hath ought against thee; Leave

there thy gift before the altar,” etc.

(Matthew 5:23–24). … Hence the philēma

is a complete reconciliation, and for that

reason it is holy.

5.4. The priest then calls out, Lift up your

hearts! For truly, at that awe-inspiring time

the heart should be lifted up to God,

devoid of all earthly things. … Then you

answer: We are turned toward the Lord,

all speaking in unison to declare our

unanimity of spirit… . Of course we

should have God in mind at all times, but

if this is impossible because of human

weakness, still at this particular time we

should make every effort to do so.

5.5. Then the priest says, Let us give thanks to the Lord. And truly, we should give

thanks that he has called us to such grace,

unworthy as we are, … condescending to

adopt us as his sons by the Spirit. Then

you say, It is right and proper, for the

thanksgiving prayer follows the prescribed

order.

5.6. Then, in our prayer we make mention of

heaven and earth and sea, of sun and moon

and stars and all the creation of rational

and irrational creatures and things visible

and invisible, of angels, archangels,

powers, princedoms, dominions, etc.

5.8. We pray for the common peace of the

church and the well-being of the world

( kosmos); for kings, commanders, and

allies, for the sick and afflicted, and, in

short, for all who need help.

5.9. After that we remember the dead—

patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs—

that God might grant our petition through the joining of our prayers with theirs. Then

we pray for … all of our own people who

have fallen asleep, believing that the

greatest possible benefit can come to the

spirits on whose behalf ( hyper hōn) the

petition is made.

5.10. I have often heard people ask: What

good does it do the departed spirit,

whether the person was good or bad in

life, to be remembered in the prayer? …

Answer: By doing for them and for

ourselves what a loving God requires

( exileoumenoi), we make available

( prospheromen) the atoning sacrifice

which Christ made for our sins.

5.11. We then pray: … Our Father who art in

the heavens, … the heavens being those in

which God dwells and among which he

circulates [continues analyzing the Lord’s

Prayer].

Concluding Rites

5.1. In the preceding meetings by the

goodness of God you have heard quite a

bit about baptism, anointing, and the taking

on of ( metalēpseōs, participation in) the body and blood of Christ. Now it is

necessary to advance to the next things,

and today we are going to place the crown

on the spiritual edifice of your endowment

( ōpheleias) .

5.2. You have just seen the prayer circle [this

is described in 5:2–16].

5.17. [The preceding rites compared to a

passage through dangerous waters and a

testing in the fire.] We have passed through

fire and water, and thou hast led us out into

the refrigerium ( anapsychēn, place of rest and refreshment [Psalm 65:10–12]). Don’t

you see them emerging safely from the

perilous passage, joyful with relief

( parrhēsiazomenous)?

5.20. After that you hear a chanter ( psallontos) inviting you with a sacred

song to share together in the holy

mysteries, saying: Taste and see how good

the Lord is! … Not bread and wine, but

the antitype of the body and blood of

Christ.

3.1. [Baptism and garment identify one with

Christ.] Being baptized and having “put on

Christ,” you have become of the same

form ( symmorphoi) as the Son of God. [So

does anointing:] For God has foreordained

you to be sons and to share the form of the

body of the glory of Christ; having become

sharers ( metochoi) with Christ, you are

properly called Christs, and of you God

has said: Do not touch my anointed ones

(Christs).

5.3–4. [The embrace has the same effect:] It

is the sign of the mingling of spirits. … In

that awesome hour [one must have one’s

mind] wholly on ( pros) God.

5.20. [Best known of all, the sacrament

establishes identity:] For those who

partake are commanded not to partake of

bread and wine but of the antitype of the

body and blood of the Christ.

5.21. [This final ordinance is now described

in terms of an embrace. As they are not to

think of the food as bread and wine, so

they are not to think of this simply as an

embrace:] As you step forward, therefore,

do not advance with the open hands

extended or with the fingers parted, but

place the left hand in support of the right

as if making a throne about to receive the

king, and holding the hand in cupping

shape ( koilanas tēn palamen), receive the

body of Christ as you respond with amen

… so that if anything is fumbled

(dropped), you must consider it as a

diminution of your own members. [The

sacrament represents a sacrificial offering, of course, and the hand is held as a

receptacle “with the palm hollowed,” to

signify the shedding of blood.]

5.23. [Conclusion:] Keep these traditions

inviolate, and see that you do not stumble.

Do not break off your unity, nor through the

defilement of sin deprive yourselves of

these

holy

spiritual

ordinances

(mysteries). … Amen.

The Clouded Mirror: Echoes in the

Church Fathers

The apostolic fathers are full of oblique

references to the ordinances; they understand

their extreme importance but are not in a

position to talk freely about them. The

situation is painfully apparent in Ignatius’s

explanation to the Trallians: “Couldn’t I

write about the higher things ( ta epourania)?

Yes, but I am afraid I would only do you

harm, since you are still but babes. I must ask you to excuse me in this—you would

simply strangle on what you are not yet able

to digest. And that goes even for me, quite

apart from my being a prisoner just now,

though I do have some knowledge ( or

mastery, dynamenos) of the high things, and the degrees ( or dwellings, topothesias) and the councils in the heavens ( lit. assemblies or natures of the rulers, archontikas), things seen and unseen. In this and more ( or

because of this, para touto) I have long

since been instructed ( lit. a disciple).” 13

The long version of this passage reads:

“Wouldn’t I like to write to you more about

the mysteries? … And I, even though a

prisoner, am able to know the higher things

( ta epourania), the degrees ( taxeis) of the angels, the interrelationships ( or the fall, exallagas) of the angels and the hosts, the distinctions of the powers and dominions,

the changes among thrones and authorities ( or the distances between seats and powers), the vastness of the eternities ( aiōnōn te

megalotētas) , the high offices of cherubim and seraphim, the exalted nature of the

Spirit, and the rule and dominion of the Lord,

and above all, the incomparable nature of the

Most High God. 14

“Therefore, I beg of you—or rather, not I,

but the love of Jesus Christ—to take only

Christian nourishment and keep from alien

exotic plants, which are false doctrine.

There are those who mix poison with Jesus

Christ, pretending that it is the real thing,

administering a deadly drug mixed with wine

and honey, so that the ignorant receive it

gladly, deadly as it is. ”15 Here it is plain that Ignatius had a lot of knowledge about the

mysteries, which, in his fixed determination

to be martyred as quickly as possible, 16 he had no intention of handing on to the

churches; yet he is much concerned about the trend in the church of filling up the gaps by

fakes and substitutes, which can only have

calamitous results. All he can do, however,

is warn against the rising tide.

The tradition of the early ordinances lives

on in the later doctors of the church as a

tantalizing mixture of intellectual abstraction

and constant hinting and hoping for

something better, such an ambivalent

position being made possible by the art of

rhetoric, which supplanted inspiration in all

the offices of the church. Thus the doctors

reduced the temple to a rhetorical

abstraction but still could never completely

escape a longing for the real temple.17 The ordinances were remembered in the same

way; a good illustration of this is Paulinus of

Nola’s Eleventh Ode to St. Felix, 18 which uses all the imagery of the old mysteries, but

on a purely “spiritual,” i.e., rhetorical, level.

It is all there: the victory of the light over the darkness, the cosmology of the heavens, the

dark and dreary world, the false gods and the

serpent driven from the temple. Though the

poem was written in Gaul and degenerate

versions of the mysteries everywhere are

held up to ridicule, the emphasis is all on

Egypt: Satan flees from Egypt, in the form of

a thousand monsters, while Joseph takes

over the cult of Serapis.19 Isis is overthrown by a neat schoolroom syllogism: “Can a

woman be a goddess? If divine, she cannot

have a body, and without a body there can be

no sex, or without sex there can be no giving

of birth. ”20 But the important thing is not that the Egyptian mysteries are collapsing, but

that they are being consciously supplanted by

other mysteries, centering around the tombs

—the tumuli of the martyrs. 21 St. Felix is the morning star, the conqueror of darkness,

expelling Bel from the temple in combat and

journeying through the underworld in the best manner of the Amduat. 22 The office of the martyrs at their tombs is the same as that of

Osiris in his—to reverse the blows of death:

the drama is still funerary and the theme is

the resurrection. 23 Constantine, acting by divine inspiration, has distributed tombs of

the martyrs throughout the civilized world as

the means of occupying every land in

conquest.24 In each place the sacred ashes spread the report of signs and wonders “like

the seeds of life scattered abroad in diverse

places,” or like rivers of life-giving water. 25

Paulinus goes on to talk of various forms of

the cross, those which represent the sacred

ordinances: not only containing the cosmic

number 365, 26 but “serving as a royal scepter over the exalted ones. Signifying that

Christ rules over all as God, who by the four

wooden extremes spread out reaches the four

utmost regions of the earth ( orbem) , ” while

the Alpha and Omega flanking the symbol of crucifixion signify that the death of Christ

was the end of all evil. 27 And so ancient ordinances survive as fossils buried in a

deep matrix of rhetoric, philosophy, and art.

Notes

1. Morton Smith, The Secret Gospel (New York: Harper and Row, 1973), 83.

2. Smith, Secret Gospel, 28.

3. Smith, Secret Gospel, 96, emphasis dropped.

4. Smith, Secret Gospel, 115.

5. Smith, Secret Gospel, 102.

6. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Christian Envy of the Temple,”

JQR 50 (1959–60): 111–18, reprinted in When the Lights Went Out: Three Studies on the Ancient Apostasy (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), 68–74, and in

Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:400–

405.

7. Theodor Förester, “Cyril of Jerusalem,” in The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge (1950; reprint, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker, 1970), 3:334–35.

8. Othmar Perler, “Kyrillos, Bisch. v. Jerusalem,” in Lexikon für Theologie und Kirche, ed. Michael Buchberger et al. (Freiburg: Herder, 1957–65), 6:710.

9. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis 19: Mystagogica (Lessons on the Initiatory Ordinances) 1–5, in PG

33:1065–128.

10. Henry G. Liddell, Robert Scott, et al., A Greek-English Lexicon, 9th ed. with supplement (Oxford: Clarendon, 1968), 1643, s.v. sth`qo~.

11. Oxford English Dictionary (Oxford: Clarendon, 1933; 2nd ed., 1989), s.v. “endue.”

12. See PG 33:1077 n. 4.

13. Ignatius, Epistola ad Trallianos 5, in PG 5:680.

14. Ignatius, Epistola ad Trallianos 5 (long version), in PG

5:781–84.

15. Ignatius, Epistola ad Trallianos 5 (short version), 6, in PG 5:680.

16. See Ignatius, Epistola ad Romanos, in PG 5:685–96.

17. See Nibley, “Christian Envy of the Temple,” 100–109, reprinted in When the Lights Went Out, 93–99, and in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:393–99.

18. Paulinus of Nola, Poemata (Poems) 19 = Carmen 11 in S. Felicem (Ode 11 to St. Felix), in PL 61:509–50.

19. Paulinus of Nola, Ode 11 to St. Felix, lines 85–100, in PL

61:515–17.

20. Paulinus of Nola, Ode 11 to St. Felix, lines 129–31, in PL

61:520.

21. Paulinus of Nola, Ode 11 to St. Felix, lines 306–15, in PL

61:529–30.

22. Paulinus of Nola, Ode 11 to St. Felix, lines 241–82, in PL

61:527–28.

23. Paulinus of Nola, Ode 11 to St. Felix, lines 309–20, in PL

61:529–30.

24. Paulinus of Nola, Ode 11 to St. Felix, lines 321–42, in PL

61:530–31.

25. Paulinus of Nola, Ode 11 to St. Felix, lines 342–77, in PL

61:531–33, quotation in lines 358–59.

26. Paulinus of Nola, Ode 11 to St. Felix, lines 604–31, in PL

61:544–45.

27. Paulinus of Nola, Ode 11 to St. Felix, lines 637–52, in PL

61:546–47, quotation in lines 638–41.

Appendix 6

From the Gospel of Philip

Nature of the Text

The Gospel of Philip is one of the Coptic

Christian documents discovered at Nag

Hammadi in Upper Egypt in 1945. Its date is

uncertain (the original is usually assigned to

the early second century A.D.), and its

classification remains uncertain, as does its

nature and purpose. In the light of what has

gone before, however, it deserves close

attention.1 The numbers following indicate plates or pages in the edition of Pahor Labib,

Coptic Gnostic Papyri in the Coptic

Museum at Old Cairo. 2 Limited space requires some condensing and paraphrasing.

Purpose of the Work

51.29–52.34: [Discourse on adoption

(initiation) into the covenant, e.g.,]

52.21–22: When we were Hebrews we were

orphans, …

23–24: but when we became Christians we

got a father and a mother. … [For this we

must take certain steps:] …

28–29: Let us sow in this world that we may

reap in the next. …

53.3–5: Those who were strangers he

bought, made them his own, and saved his

own. …

8: [The plan goes back to the creation:]

Since the day the world came into

existence

9: he laid down his life. Of his own free will

at that time,

10: even at the beginning, he came …

14–16: to ransom [the soul of man. In this

world the law of opposition prevails in all

things]. …

21–23: [The plan belongs to the eternal

order of things.]

54.5–13: [Those who know the true name of

the Son do not speak of it, such things

being kept secret from the world,] …

18–25: [because Satan’s followers (the

Archons), jealous of man’s heritage, seek

to

pervert

all

things

through

the

manipulation of words and labels.]

Purification, the Garden, Hieros

Gamos, and the Fall

55.6–11: [Until Christ came we were

outcasts from the paradise of Adam, living

under a grim economy.]

12–13: But the perfect man ( teleios; initiate) brings back the heavenly nourishment. …

17–35: [The father of Adam is the father of

Christ.]

23–30: [Mary is the type of the virginal Eve,

the earthly mother.] …

56.3–13: [The names of Christ.]

13–15: Christ contains all things in himself

whether as man, angel, mystery, or father.

…

24–32: [The flesh, as a garment to cover our

nakedness,] …

57.4–5: [is sustained by food and drink (of

the sacrament).] …

11–19: [It will rise in the resurrection.]

19–24: [On earthly and heavenly garments:

the latter are put on with a purifying by

water and fire,] …

27–28: [the fire being the anointing

( chrism) . ] …

58.15–17: [You cannot enter into the king’s

presence without proper clothing.]

17–22: [Adam is our example:] If the

children of Adam are numerous though

mortal, how much more so the posterity of

the perfect man that do not die and go on

being born forever!

59.1–4: [The hieros gamos is represented by a holy kiss.] …

6–12: [The three Marys are types of Eve.]

…

31–32: [Sophia (Wisdom) is barren without

(?) the Son (text damaged).] …

60.6–8: [Because of the fall we are all

astray; ] …

11–12: [our Sophia is the Sophia of death; ]

…

19–23: [man toils in the fields along with the

beasts.]

23–31: [The perfect man (initiate) also toils,

for the very purpose of earth life is to meet

opposition, while the Holy Ghost

supervises everything.]

61.1–6: [Though of noble lineage, Adam’s

posterity turned to adultery and murder,]

7–9: a bastard race, a son of the Serpent, who became a murderer like his father.

The Way Back

61.12–18: [We are like cloth that must be

dyed anew; God is the dyer.]

19–20: [The dyeing is baptism (dunking) in

water.] …

62.7–16: [The various names of Christ and

their meanings.]

17–23: [He is the pearl, the precious jewel

that never loses its value in any situation; ]

23–24: such also are the sons of God [ i.e.,

Stones of Truth]. …

63.11–29: [The way is one of continual

progress ( prokoptei) , no mere empty ordinances.]

63.30–64:4 [By herself Sophia is barren.

The importance of Mary.]

64.5–9: [Jesus says, No matter how good the

eyes, no one sees in the dark: until the

apostles have more light they will not

understand these things.]

10–22: [For man’s true stature and

preexistence are not revealed.]

22–29: [Baptism and the title of Christian

are but borrowed goods without the Holy

Ghost and] the gift of the name.

29–37: [The world could not stand without

the great mystery of marriage (…) (text

damaged).]

65.1–37: [In this wicked and adulterous

world, marriage is the best defense against

evil.] …

66.4–13: [The flesh is to be neither loved

nor despised.]

10–20: [Seek the Way of Life that leads to

rest instead of suspense ( mesotēs)

hereafter],

20–21: for many go astray. …

66.29–67.1: [The condition of the world

compared with a burning house.]

Recapitulation of Ordinances

67.2–5: The soul and the spirit ( pneuma)

emerge from the water and the fire as the son of the bridal chamber,

5–6: fire being the anointing which imparts a

special beauty and light. …

9–11: [Truth must enter the world properly

clothed] in types and images.

12–16: [Thus there is both a rebirth and a

symbolic rebirth, and it is quite possible

to be born again ritually (figuratively);

there is a resurrection and a type of the

resurrection,]

16–18: [and so with the bridal chamber, an

image looking forward to reality—a

“restoration” ( apokatastasis) . ]

19–25: [One must receive a new name with

the anointing of ransom,]

26–27: [becoming] no longer a Christian but

a Christ.

27–30: [The Lord did everything by

ordinance ( mystērion)], there being five steps: [baptism, anointing, eucharist,

ransom (sacrifice), and bridal chamber.]

68.1–17: [The world is shut out from the

view of eternal things.]

17–22: [Before Christ came we were

trapped; there was no way back.]

23–28: [When Eve became separated from

Adam,] death entered in, [and we are shut

out until they are united again]

69.1–8: [in a marriage which, though

physical, is not bestial; it is only for free

men and virgins, through the Holy Ghost,

by which we are born again a second time,

being] …

12–14: [washed with water and anointed

with light.]

14–22: There were three houses of sacrifice

in Jerusalem, [ i.e., ] … the holy place, …

the holy of holy, and … the holy of holies,

which only the high priest could enter.

22–25: [These correspond to baptism

(lacuna: anointing or ransom), and bridal

chamber, which represent]

26–27: [the resurrection, the atonement, and

marriage ( nymphōn) . ]

27–28: [The bridal chamber is higher than

the other mysteries (lacuna).] …

35–37: The veil parted […] the bridal

chamber, but without the imagery ( eikon)

[…].

70.1–4: [The parting (or rending; pōh) of the veil makes it possible for some to pass

from the lower to the higher,]

5–8: [clothing themselves in perfect light,]

9: in the ordinance ( mystērion) of the uniting (joining).

10–12: [Since it was the separation of the

woman and the man that brought death,]

13–17: Christ came for the express purpose

of … bringing them together again [in

eternal life; thanks to him,] …

19–20: those who are united in the bridal

chamber will never more be separated.

Applied to Adam

70.20–26: [Adam himself represents a union

of the spirit and flesh effected by a breath

(text damaged), hence a living soul.]

71.1–3: [Adam] was begotten again ( palin) , again became a son, again was anointed,

again was ransomed, and again paid the

price ( af-sōte) .

3–7: If it is permitted to utter a mystery, the

Father of All united with the Virgin. … It

was he who revealed the bridal chamber,

8: so that his [Adam’s] body came into

existence

9: on that day. …

12–15: In the same way Jesus established

everything on that foundation (by means of

these), and it is necessary for every

follower of his to enter into his rest.

16–22: [Just as Adam had as mothers the

Spirit and the virginal earth, so Christ was

born of a virgin to mend the effects of the

fall.]

24–26: [For] Adam ate of the tree which

begets animals and became an animal […]

[cf. Moses 3:18–21].

72.5–17: [All these things and doings pertain

to a figurative ( eikonikos) Adam.]

Applied to the Initiates

72.17–29: [The duty of those who have been

saved is to save others.] In the kingdom of

heaven the free will minister to the slaves

72.30–73.1: going down into the water […]

to ransom him […] in his name. For he

said […] we shall fulfill righteousness

[text damaged].

73.1–4: [If we do not receive the rites of

resurrection in this life, we have nothing

coming.]

5–8: The same holds true of baptism: … they

who receive it will live.

8–19: Joseph the Carpenter planted a garden

[from a tree which was made the cross: it was the tree of life in the midst of

paradise, and also the olive tree from

which the anointing ( chreisma) came for

his resurrection (oil of healing)].

19–23: [All physical things are consumed in

this world (cf. the Ouroboros serpent),]

23–27: [but Jesus supplies us with the food

of another life.]

27–28: God prepared a garden (paradise)

[…].

74.1–8: [Adam ate of all the trees, but the

tree of knowledge killed him; yet it saved

mankind,] for the law was the tree, giving

knowledge of good and evil. Yet many

continue in evil unto death [cf. Moroni

7:5–19]. …

12–15: [Anointing is higher than baptism,

making us Christians.]

15–21: [Christ was so called because of the

anointing. For] the Father anointed the

Son, and the Son anointed the apostles, and the apostles anointed us. He who is

anointed possesses everything: the

resurrection, the light, the cross, the Holy

Ghost;

21–24: the Father gave him this in the bridal

chamber, and he received it; the Father

partook of the Son and the Son of the

Father. This is the kingdom of heaven.

[Badly damaged section about the literal

substratum of the ordinances—this is more

than mere wordplay.]

75.2–10: [The world is in a fallen state in

which nothing endures.]

10–11: [All things pass away—only

posterity is eternal.]

11–13: No one will be able to partake of

incorruption without becoming a son.

13–14: [For we receive that we might give

to others.]

15–21: [Whenever we drink of the

sacramental cup,] we shall receive for ourselves the perfect man, likewise …

24–25: [he who goes down into the water

unclothes himself and puts on the living

man as a garment.]

25–27: [Every creature begets after its kind.]

…

34–36: Christians are a choice breed …

76.5: and we are a special species [text

damaged], true man and son of man …

sons of the bridal chamber in this world.

6–9: [The mating in the next world is of an

entirely different nature from this one;

though we use earthly vocabulary in

speaking of them,]

9–12: [there are other forms of union that

transcend all description ( lit. naming).] …

17–22: [Indeed, it is not needful that they

who have all these things know absolutely

everything; let them enjoy what they have.]

22–26: [The teleios (initiate) cannot be held

back,]

27–28: [being clothed in the garment of

perfect light] …

31–33: [even before he leaves this world.]

77.1: Only Jesus knows the end (goal) of all

this.

2–9: [The truly pure is wholly pure, even to

the flesh; he renders pure whatever he

receives: the bread, the cup, or anything

else.]

The Substitute (Arrested) Sacrifice

77.9–11: [We go down into the water, but we

do not have to suffer death by it.]

12–15: [The spirit of the world blows

winter and death, but the Holy Ghost

blows life and summer.]

15–20: [Knowledge makes free.]

20–26: [If we do not return to the sinful

ways of the world we shall escape, freed

from the world; our minds will be

expanded,]

26–31: [and we shall become the servants of

others who are not yet free, freeing them

through the work of love]

31–36: [and sharing freely with all,]

78.1–3: [that they too may enjoy the

anointing at the hands of those who have

received it.]

4–7: [If the latter stand aloof, their own

anointing will be an evil odor.]

7–11: [Our example is the Good Samaritan:

the wine and oil he administered] is

nothing else than the anointing [by which

love heals ( therapeue) the blows of death

( plēgē)]. …

15–25: [The fruit of our love should not be

that of this adulterous generation, but of

the Lord, that our offspring may be like

him.]

78.25–79.1: [Like embraces like, species

mingle with their own kind, spirit with

spirit, logos with logos, all in perfect unity.]

Sacred Embracing

79.1–11: [Light should cleave to light in a

kind of intercourse; ]

12–13: [another spirit or species cannot

enjoy you because you have no part in it.]

…

18–30: [As the husbandry of earth rests on

the four elements, so God’s husbandry

rests on four virtues: faith, hope, love

( agapē) , and knowledge.]

80.1–5: [The perfect man (Christ) is an

offense to this world.]

6–8: [How then can we hope to save

others?]

8–10: [The first rule is to offend no man,]

10–22: [but to give comfort and joy to all.]

23–34: [There is an analogy between the

world’s economy]

81.1–14: [and God’s economy, in which each creature receives its particular

requirements in its own sphere and

element,]

14–29: [including the human race, which

receives from God through the Son of Man

the power both to beget and to create, even

as they were begotten and created.]

30–35: [The process of begetting remains a

secret, however.]

82.1–4: [If earthly procreation is an intimate

and secret thing,]

5–11: how much more concealed is the

undefiled marriage, a true mystery? It is

not carnal but pure, [having nothing of lust

and darkness.]

11–26: [The marriage relationship should be

ever modest, discreet, and withdrawn.]

Sacrifice Again

82.26–31: [Abraham’s circumcision] teaches

us to sacrifice the flesh in this world. As long as their […] are intact and they live,

32–34: [but when they] are exposed they die

after the manner […] of the visible man.

35: So long as the entrails of a man are

covered he lives,

83.1–2: that is to say, when his insides come

out he dies.

3–17: So it is with a tree [which survives

various cuts inflicted on it by the axe as

long as its root remains.]

18–35: [What we must really uproot and kill

is all the malice within us.]

Concerning the Veil

84.1–12: [As truth is revealed step by step,

it makes us free.]

13–14: [We must become united to the truth,

receiving a fulness,]

15–20: [not despising things because they

are hidden,]

20–21: [for] they are mysteries of truth manifested in types and images. …

23–25: The veil concealed in the beginning

how God carried out the creation.

25–26: But if the veil is parted (rent)

27–29: and the things behind the veil become

known, the house is destroyed and left

desolate or rather destroyed,

29–31: and the Godhead utterly desert that

place, the holy of holies,

31–32: which can no longer be related to the

unconstrained light and the immensity of

undefiled pleroma.

33–34: Instead, it will come under the wing

of the cross and under its arms.

84.34–85.1: This ark [of the covenant, the

original holy of holies,] will become for

us a wall ( jaei; barrier, veil)3 when the flood overwhelms them.

85.1–5: If some are of the order ( phylē) of the priesthood they will be allowed to

enter within the veil along with the high priest,

5–13: [but the rending (parting, opening) of

the veil from top to bottom means that

higher things are now made accessible to

us below,] permitting us also to enter into

the secret of the truth.

14–15: But we enter by means of despised

symbols (types) and in our weakness(es).

16: [The symbols we have now] are indeed

meager compared with the perfect glory,

17–18: for there is glory above glory and

power above power,

18–19: so that the fulness ( teleion) opens up to us with the hidden truths,

19–21: even the holy of holies and the bridal

chamber.

20–24: [These things are kept secret to

frustrate the malicious, but they are not

withheld from the company of the seed of

the Holy Ghost.]

24: [Though sin still enslaves us,]

25–27: when the truth is revealed the perfect

light will flow for everyone,

27–31: [and all it envelops will receive the

anointing, be liberated and ransomed,]

31–32: [that those who were separated may

be united and filled,]

32–33: [and] all who enter the bridal

chamber may beget the light; […]

34–35: [not after the manner of nocturnal

mating],

86.1–4: for the mysteries of this marriage are

consummated in the light of day, that day

whose light will never fade.

4–5: Whoever becomes a son of the bridal

chamber will receive the light,

6–7: but unless he receives it in these places,

he will not be able to receive it in the next

world (the other place).

7–11: [He who receives it in this world

cannot be overcome by the world,]

11–13: and when he goes out of the world he has already received the truth in images

[cf. John 5:24, 29: who passes the test

( krisis) here will not have to undergo it

again].

13–18: The world came into being for the

sake of the aeons, each of which expands

to an infinite pleroma, … to a perfect day

and a holy light.

18: The Gospel according to Philip.

Notes

1. See Gospel of Philip, in Neutestamentliche Apokryphen in deutscher Übersetzung, ed. and trans.

Edgar Hennecke and Wilhelm Schneemelcher, 3rd ed.

(Tübingen: Mohr, 1959–64), 1:197–99; English

translation, New Testament Apocrypha, ed. Robert M.

Wilson, trans. J. B. Higgins et al. (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1963–65), 1:276–78; Walter Till, Das Evangelium nach Philippos (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1963); Robert M. Wilson, ed. and trans., The Gospel of Philip (New York: Harper and Row, 1962); Wesley W.

Isenberg, “The Gospel of Philip (II, 3),” in James M.

Robinson, ed., The Nag Hammadi Library in English

(San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1977), 131–51; Bentley Layton, The Gnostic Scriptures: A New

Translation with Annotations and Introductions (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1987), 325–53.

2. Pahor Labib and Mahaf al-Qibti (Antiquities Department), Coptic Gnostic Papyri in the Coptic Museum at Old Cairo (Cairo: Government Press, 1956), 1:99–134.

[Since the first edition of this work was published in 1975, The Facsimile Edition of the Nag Hammadi Codices (Leiden: Brill, 1974–84), in twelve volumes, has been published, and the page numbers of the codices were renumbered. Since the new numbering is now

standard, we follow it here; to obtain the old page numbers, add 48 to the given page numbers. The Gospel of Philip is found in Codex II—eds.]

3. Walter E. Crum, A Coptic Dictionary (Oxford: Clarendon, 1939), 753.

Bibliography

Adam, Alfred. Die Psalmen des Thomas

und das Perlenlied als Zeugnisse

vorchristlicher Gnosis. Beihefte zur

Zeitschrift für die neuetestamentenliche

Wissenschaft und die Kunde der älteren

Kirche 24. Berlin: Töpelmann, 1959.

———. “Ein vergessener Aspekt des

frühchristlichen Herrenmahles: Ein

Beitrag zur Geschichte des

Abendmahlsverständnisses der alten

Kirche.” Theologische Literaturzeitung

88 (1963): 9–20.

Aldred, Cyril. “The End of the El-ʿAmārna

Period.” JEA 43 (1957): 30–41.

Alföldi, Andreas. “Die Geschichte des

Throntabernakels.” Nouvelle Clio 2

(1950): 537–66.

Allberry, C. R. C. A Manichaean Psalm-

Book. 2 vols. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer,

1938.

Allegro, John M. Qumrân Cave 4: I

(4Q158–4Q186). Discoveries in the

Judaean Desert of Jordan 5. Oxford:

Clarendon, 1968.

Allen, T. George. The Egyptian Book of the

Dead: Documents in the Oriental

Institute Museum at the University of

Chicago. University of Chicago

Oriental Institute Publications 82.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1960.

Alt, Albrecht. “Menschen ohne Namen.”

ArOr 18/1 (1950): 9–24.

Altenmüller, Hartwig. Messersee,’

‘gewundener Wasserlauf,’ und

‘Flammensee.’” ZÄS 92 (1966): 86–95.

———. Review of Das Amduat, by Erik Hornung. OLZ 61 (1966): 444–48.

———. Review of The Pyramid of Unas,

by Alexandre Piankoff. BiOr 26 (1969):

60–61.

———. “Zur Lesung und Deutung des

dramatischen Ramesseumpapyrus.”

JEOL 6/19 (1965–66): 421–42.

Altmann, Alexander. “The Gnostic

Background of the Rabbinic Adam

Legends.” JQR, n.s., 35 (1944–45):

371–91.

Amélineau, Émile. L’enfer égyptien et

l’enfer virgilien: Étude de mythologie

comparée. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale,

1914.

Andersson-Akmar, Ernst. “L’être pur: Celui

qui est pur: Notice du mot neter.”

Sphinx 22 (1925): 1–5.

Anthes, Rudolf. “Atum, Nefertem und die

Kosmogonien von Heliopolis: Ein

Versuch.” ZÄS 82 (1958): 1–8.

———. “Der Berliner Hocker des

Petamenophis.” ZÄS 73 (1937): 25–35.

———. “Egyptian Theology in the Third

Millennium B.C.” JNES 18 (1959):

169–212.

———. “König ‘Schlange,’ ḏt-Schlange und

Schlangengöttin Uto.” ZÄS 83 (1958):

79–82.

———. “Die Maat des Echnaton von

Amarna.” Journal of the American

Oriental Society, Supplement 14

(1952): 1–36.

———. “Mythologie und der gesunde

Menschenverstand im alten Ägypten.”

Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-

Gesellschaft zu Berlin 96 (1966): 5–40.

———. “The Original Meaning of Mȝʿ

ḪRW.” JNES 13 (1954): 21–51.

———. Review of The Shrines of Tut-

ankh-Amun, by Alexandre Piankoff.

Artibus Asiae 20 (1957): 92.

———. “Das Sonnenauge in den

Pyramidentexten.” ZÄS 86 (1961): 1–

21.

———. “Die Sonnenboote in den

Pyramidentexten.” ZÄS 82 (1958): 77–

89.

———. “Zum Ursprung des Nefertem.” ZÄS

80 (1955): 81–89.

Autran, Charles. “Sothis-Sirius et le monde

préhellénique.” In Mélanges Maspero

I: Orient ancien, 529–44. MIFAO 66.2.

Cairo: IFAO, 1935–38.

Badawi, Ahmad Mohamad. Der Gott

Chnum. PhD diss. Friedrich Wilhelms-

Universität, Berlin. Glückstadt:

Augustin, 1937.

Baer, Klaus. “The Breathing Permit of Hôr:

A Translation of the Apparent Source of

the Book of Abraham.” Dialogue 3/3

(1968): 109–34.

Bailey, John A. “Initiation and the Primal Woman in Gilgamesh and Genesis 2–3.”

JBL 89 (1970): 137–50.

Baillet, Jules. “L’anthropophagie dans

l’Égypte primitive.” BIFAO 30 (1931):

65–72.

———. “Contribution à l’histoire des

origines de la momification.” RT 22

(1900): 180–99.

Baines, John. “Bnbn: Mythological and

Linguistic Notes.” Or 39 (1970): 389–

404.

Bakir, Abd el-Moḥsen. “The Cairo Calendar

of Lucky and Unlucky Days.” ASAE 48

(1948): 425–33.

———. “Nḥḥ and ḏt Reconsidered.” JEA 39

(1953): 110–11.

Baly, T. J. Colin. “Notes on the Ritual of

Opening the Mouth.” JEA 16 (1930):

173–86.

———. “The Ritual Significance of the

Funerary Objects.” In The Bucheum, ed.

Robert Mond and Oliver H. Myers,

1:132–36. London: Egypt Exploration

Society, 1934.

Barguet, Paul. Le Livre des Morts des

anciens égyptiens. Paris: Cerf, 1967.

———. “L’origine et la signification du

contrepoids de collier-menat.” BIFAO

52 (1953): 103–11.

———. Review of The Pyramid of Unas:

Texts Translated with Commentary, by

Alexandre Piankoff. RHR 177 (1970):

65–69.

———. “La structure du temple Ipet-Sout

d’Amon à Karnak du Moyen Empire à

Aménophis II.” BIFAO 52 (1953): 145–

55.

Barta, Winfried. “Bemerkungen zur

Darstellung der Jahreszeiten im Grabe

des Mrr-wj-kȝ.j.” ZÄS 97 (1971): 1–7.

———. “Der Königsring als Symbol

zyklischer Wiederkehr.” ZÄS 98 (1970): 5–16.

———. “Das Opferritual im täglichen

Tempelkult.” JEOL 6/19 (1965–66):

457–61.

———. Review of Canopics, by George A.

Reisner. OLZ 66 (1971): 135–39.

———. Review of The Report about the

Dispute of a Man with His Ba, by Hans

Goedicke. BiOr 29 (1972): 23–26.

———. “Zum Goldnamen der ägyptischen

Könige im Alten Reich.” ZÄS 95

(1969): 80–88.

———. “Zum scheinbaren

Bedeutungswandel des Seth in den

Pyramidentexten.” JEOL 7/20 (1967–

68): 43–49.

———. “Zur Frage des Zusammenhangs

ramessidischer Ritualszenen auf der

Umfassungsmauer in Karnak.” OLZ 66

(1971): 5–14.

———. “Zur Verteilung der 12

Nachtstunden des Amduat in Grabe

Tuthmosis’ III.” JEOL 7/21 (1969–70):

164–68.

Le Bas, Edwin E. “Was the Corner-Stone of

Scripture a Pyramidion?” Palestine

Exploration Quarterly 78 (1946): 103–

15.

Bauer, Walter, ed. and trans. Die Oden

Salomos. Kleine Texte für Vorlesungen

und Übungen 64. Berlin: de Gruyter,

1933.

Bayer, Wilhelm. “Die Religion der ältesten

ägyptischen Inschriften.” Anthropos 20

(1925): 1093–1121; 22 (1927): 404–29,

889–910; 23 (1928): 511–37.

Beer, Bernhard. Leben Abraham’s nach

Auffassung der jüdischen Sage.

Leipzig: Leiner, 1859.

Bergman, Jan. Ich bin Isis: Studien zum

memphitischen Hintergrund der

griechischen Isisaretalogien. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis: Historia

Religionum 3. Uppsala: Berlingska,

1968.

Bernard, John H. The Odes of Solomon.

Contributions to Biblical and Patristic

Literature: Texts and Studies 8.3. 1912.

Reprint, Nendeln, Liechtenstein: Kraus,

1967.

Bin Gorion, Micha Josef. Die Sagen der

Juden. 5 vols. Frankfurt: Rütten und

Loening, 1913–27.

Birch, Samuel. “On Formulas Relating to the

Heart.” ZÄS 8 (1870): 30–34; 46–48;

73–81.

von Bissing, Friedrich Wilhelm Freiherrn.

“Apotheosis by Drowning.” RT 34

(1912): 37–38.

———. “Osiris im Boot.” ZÄS 67 (1931):

15–19.

———. Untersuchungen zu den Reliefs aus

dem Re-Heiligtum des Rathures.

Abhandlungen der Bayerischen

Akademie der Wissenschaften,

philosophisch-philologische und

historische Klasse 32.1. Munich:

Bayerischen Akademie der

Wissenschaften, 1922.

Bisson de la Roque, Fernand. “Le lac sacré

de Tôd.” CdE 12 (1937): 157–62.

Bjerke, Svein. “Remarks on the Egyptian

Ritual of ‘Opening the Mouth’ and Its

Interpretation.” Numen 12 (1965): 201–

16.

Black, Matthew. Apocalypsis Henochi

Graece. Leiden: Brill, 1970.

Blackman, Aylward M. “The Funerary

Papyrus of ʿEnkhefenkhons.” JEA 4

(1917): 122–29.

———. The House of the Morning.’” JEA 5

(1918): 148–65.

———. “The King of Egypt’s Grace before

Meat.” JEA 31 (1945): 57–73.

———. “Libations to the Dead in Modern

Nubia and Ancient Egypt.” JEA 3

(1916): 31–34.

———. “Lustrations and the Heliopolitan

Sun-Cult.” PSBA 40 (1918): 57–66, 86–

91.

———. “Osiris or the Sun-God? A Reply to

Mr. Perry.” JEA 11 (1925): 201–9.

———. “The Pharaoh’s Placenta and the

Moon-god Khons.” JEA 3 (1916): 235–

49.

———. Review of Hieratic Papyri in the

British Museum: Third Series: Chester

Beatty Gift, by Alan H. Gardiner. JEA 22 (1936): 103–6.

———. “The Rite of Opening the Mouth in

Ancient Egypt and Babylonia.” JEA 10

(1924): 47–59.

———. “Sacramental Ideas and Usages in

Ancient Egypt.” RT 39 (1921): 44–78.

———. “The Significance of Incense and Libations in Funerary and Temple

Ritual.” ZÄS 50 (1912): 69–75.

———. “Some Notes on the Ancient

Egyptian Practice of Washing the Dead.”

JEA 5 (1918): 117–24.

———. “A Study of the Liturgy Celebrated

in the Temple of the Aton, at El-

Amarna.” In Recueil d’études

égyptologiques, 505–27.

Blackman, Winifred S. “Sacred Trees in

Modern Egypt.” JEA 11 (1925): 56–57.

Bleeker, Claas J. Egyptian Festivals:

Enactments of Religious Renewal.

Studies in the History of Religion

(Supplements to Numen) 13. Leiden:

Brill, 1967.

———. “Guilt and Purification in Ancient

Egypt.” Numen 13 (1966): 81–87.

———, ed. Initiation. Studies in the History of Religion (Supplements to Numen) 10.

Leiden: Brill, 1965.

———. “Initiation in Ancient Egypt.” In

Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 49–58.

———. “Isis and Nephthys as Wailing

Women.” Numen 5 (1958): 1–17.

———. “The Pattern of the Ancient

Egyptian Culture.” Numen 11 (1964):

75–82.

———. “The Religion of Ancient Egypt.” In

Religions of the Past. Vol. 1 of Historia Religionum: Handbook for the History

of Religions, ed. C. J. Bleeker and Geo

Widengren, 40–114. Leiden: Brill,

1969.

———. “Some Introductory Remarks on the

Significance of Initiation.” In Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 15–20.

Bonnet, Hans. “Die Bedeutung der

Räucherungen im ägyptischen Kult.”

ZÄS 67 (1931): 20–28.

———. “Herkunft and Bedeutung der

naophoren Statue.” MDAIK 17 (1961): 91–98.

———. Reallexikon der ägyptischen

Religionsgeschichte. 2nd ed. Berlin: de

Gruyter, 1971.

———. Review of Totenglauben und

Jenseitsvorstellungen der alten

Ägypter. 2nd ed., by Hermann Kees.

OLZ 52 (1957): 402–5.

“The Book of Abraham” (A Synopsis of a

Lecture by N. L. Nelson). Academic

Review: Brigham Young Academy,

Provo, Utah 1/6 (March 1885): 46.

Borchardt, Ludwig. “Altägyptische

Sonnenuhren.” ZÄS 48 (1910): 9–17.

———. “Die Cyperussäule.” ZÄS 40

(1902–3): 36–49.

———. “Eine Reisesonnenuhr aus

Ägypten.” ZÄS 49 (1911): 66–68.

———. “Schiffahrt auf dem Lande.” ASAE

39 (1939): 377–80.

Boreux, Charles. “À propos de quelques bustes égyptiens.” In Studies Presented

to F. Ll. Griffith, ed. Glanville, 395–

401.

Botti, Giuseppe. “Il Libro del Respirare e un

suo nuovo esemplare nel Papiro

demotico N. 766 del Museo Egizio di

Torino.” JEA 54 (1968): 223–30.

Bourassa, François S. J. “La grâce

sacramentelle et l’onction des malades.”

Sciences ecclésiastiques 19 (1967):

33–47.

Box, George H. The Apocalypse of

Abraham. London: Society for

Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1919.

Boylan, Patrick. Thoth: The Hermes of

Egypt. London: Oxford University

Press, 1922.

Brandon, S. G. F. “The Significance of Time

in Some Ancient Initiatory Rituals.” In

Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 40–48.

Breasted, James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt. 5 vols. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press, 1906–7.

———. Development of Religion and

Thought in Ancient Egypt. New York:

Scribner’s Sons, 1912.

———. “The Philosophy of a Memphite

Priest.” ZÄS 39 (1901): 39–54.

Brockelmann, Carl. Lexicon Syriacum.

Halle: Niemeyer, 1928.

Brugsch, Heinrich K. Dictionnaire

hiéroglyphique et démotique

(Hieroglyphisch-demotisches

Wörterbuch). 7 vols. Leipzig: Hinrichs,

1867–82.

———. “Das Osiris-Mysterium von

Tentyra.” ZÄS 19 (1881): 77–111.

———. Religion und Mythologie der alten

Ägypter nach den Denkmälern.

Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1891.

———. Thesaurus inscriptionum

aegyptiacarum. 6 vols in 1. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1883–91.

Bruijning, F. F. “The Tree of the

Herakleopolite Nome.” Ancient Egypt

(1921): 104–9; (1922): 1–8.

Brunner, Hellmut. Grundzüge einer

Geschichte altägyptischen Literatur.

Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche

Buchgesellschaft, 1966.

———. Review of Untersuchungen zu den

ägyptischen Tempelreliefs der

griechisch-römischen Zeit, by Erich

Winter. AfO 23 (1970): 118–20.

———. “Zum Verständnis der

archaisierenden Tendenzen in der

ägyptischen Spätzeit.” Saeculum 21

(1970): 151–61.

———. “Zum Verständnis des Spruches 312

der Sargtexte.” ZDMG 111 (1961):

439–45.

Bruyère, B. “Neb-nerou et Hery-Mâat.” CdE

27/ 53 (1952): 31–42.

de Buck, Adriaan. “Un chapitre de

psychologie égyptienne.” CdE 21

(1946): 17–24.

———. “The Dramatic Text.” In The

Cenotaph of Seti I, ed. Henri Frankfort,

1:82–86; 2: pls. 84–85.

———. “The Earliest Version of Book of

the Dead 78.” JEA 35 (1949): 87–97.

———. The Egyptian Coffin Texts. 7 vols.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1935–61.

———. Egyptian Readingbook: Exercises

and Middle Egyptian Texts. 2nd ed.

Leiden: Nederlands Instituut voor het

Nabije Oosten, 1963.

———. De Egyptische Voorstellingen

betreffende den Oerheuvel. Leiden:

Ijdo, 1922.

———. “On the Meaning of the Name

Ḥʿpj.” In Orientalia Neerlandica: A

Volume of Oriental Studies, 1–22.

Leiden: Sijthoff’s

Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V., 1948.

Budge, E. A. Wallis. The Book of the Dead:

Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer,

A.nhai, Kerāsher and Netchemet.

London: British Museum, 1899.

———. The Book of the Dead: The

Papyrus of Ani, Scribe and Treasurer

of the Temples of Egypt, about B.C.

1450. 3 vols. New York: Putnam’s Sons,

1913.

———. The Book of Opening the Mouth. 2

vols. London: Kegan Paul, Trench,

Trübner, 1909.

———. Coptic Apocrypha in the Dialect of

Upper Egypt. 1913. Reprint, New York:

AMS, 1977.

———. Coptic Martyrdoms, etc., in the

Dialect of Upper Egypt. 1914. Reprint,

New York: AMS, 1977.

———. Egyptian Religion: Egyptian Ideas of the Future Life. New York:

University Books, 1959.

———. Miscellaneous Coptic Texts in the

Dialect of Upper Egypt. 1915. Reprint,

New York: AMS, 1977.

———. “On the Hieratic Papyrus of Nesi-

Amsu, a Scribe in the Temple of Amen-

Rā at Thebes, about B.C. 305.”

Archaeologia 52 (1890): 393–601.

———. Osiris and the Egyptian

Resurrection. 2 vols. New York: Dover,

1973.

Bullard, Roger A. The Hypostasis of the

Archons. Patristische Texte und Studien

10. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1970.

Bultmann, Rudolf. “Die Bedeutung der

neuerschlossenen mandäischen und

manichäischen Quellen für das

Verständnis des Johannesevangeliums.”

Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche

Wissenschaft 24 (1925): 100–46.

Burch, Vacher. “The ‘Stone’ and the ‘Keys’

(Mt. 16:18ff).” JBL 52 (1933): 147–52.

Burmester, Oswald H. E. “Egyptian

Mythology in the Coptic Apocrypha.”

Or 7 (1938): 355–67.

Cabrol, Fernand, and Henri Leclercq.

Dictionnaire d’archéologie chrétienne

et de liturgie. 15 vols. Paris: Letouzey

et Ané, 1907–53.

Capart, Jean. “L’exaltation du livre.” CdE

21/41 (1946): 25–28.

———. “À propos du cercueil d’argent du

roi Chechonq.” CdE 18/36 (1943):

191–98.

———. Review of “De Lijkpapyrus van

Sensaos,” by Bruno H. Stricker. CdE

18/36 (1943): 265–66.

Capovilla, Giovanni. “Aegyptiaca:

Contributo all’espansione culturale dell’

Egitto antico.” Aegyptus 38 (1958): 69–

108.

Caquot, André. “Pour une étude de

l’initiation dans l’ancien Israël.” In

Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 119–33.

Carter, Howard, and Alan H. Gardiner. “The

Tomb of Ramesses IV and the Turin Plan

of a Royal Tomb.” JEA 4 (1917): 130–

58.

de Cenival, Françoise. “Les associations

dans les temples égyptiens d’après les

données fournies par les papyrus

démotiques.” In REHR, 5–19.

Černý, Jaroslav. Ancient Egyptian Religion.

London: Hutchinson’s University

Library, 1952.

———. “A Note on the Recently

Discovered Boat of Cheops.” JEA

41(1955): 75–79.

Chabas, François J. “Les libations chez les

anciens égyptiens.” In Oeuvres diverses,

ed. Gaston Maspero, 5:169–85. BE 13.

Paris: Leroux, 1909.

Champollion, Jean-François. Monuments

d’Égypte et de la Nubie. 4 vols. Paris:

Didot, 1835–45.

———. Panthéon Égyptien: Connection

des personnages mythologiques de

l’ancienne Égypte. Paris: Didot, 1823.

Chapira, Bernard. “Légendes bibliques

attribuées à Ka’b el-Ahbar.” Revue des

études juives 69 (1919): 86–107.

Charles, Robert H. The Apocrypha and

Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament.

2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon, 1913.

Charlesworth, James H., ed. and trans. The

Odes of Solomon. Chico, Calif.:

Scholars, 1977.

———. ed. The Old Testament

Pseudepigrapha. 2 vols. Garden City,

N.Y.: Doubleday, 1983–85.

Chassinat, Émile. “Le livre de protéger la

barque divine.” RT 16 (1894): 105–22.

———. “Le Livre Second des

Respirations.” RHR 31 (1895): 312–19.

———. “La mise à mort rituelle d’Apis.”

RT 38 (1916–17): 33–60.

———. “Les papyrus magiques 3237 et

3239 ju Louvre.” RT 14 (1893): 10–17.

Cherbonnier, E. “The Logic of Biblical

Anthropomorphism.” Harvard

Theological Review 55 (1962): 187–

206.

Clark, James R. The Story of the Pearl of

Great Price. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft,

1955.

von Clausewitz, Karl. On War. Trans. J. J.

Graham. 3 vols. Rev. ed. London:

Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1956.

Clère, Jacques J. “Un hymne à Abydos sur

une stèle inédite d’époque Ramesside.”

ZÄS 84 (1959): 86–104.

———. “Un passage de la stèle du général

Antef.” BIFAO 30 (1931): 425–47.

Coenen, Marc. “The Dating of Papyri Joseph Smith I, X and XI and Min Who

Massacres His Enemies.” In Egyptian

Religion: The Last Thousand Years, ed.

Willy Clarysse, Antoon Schoors, and

Harco Willems, 2:1102–15 . Leuven:

Peeters, 1998.

Collier, Fred C., ed. The Teachings of

President Brigham Young. 7 vols. Salt

Lake City: Collier’s, 1987.

Cook, Lyndon W. David Whitmer

Interviews: A Restoration Witness.

Orem, Utah: Grandin, 1991.

Couroyer, Bernard. “La terre du Dieu.”

Revue biblique 78 (1971): 59–70.

Cross, Frank Moore, Jr. “The Scrolls and the

New Testament.” Christian Century 72

(1955): 968–71.

Crowe, John H., and Alan F. Cooper Jr.

“Cryptobiosis.” Scientific American,

December 1971, 30–36.

Crum, Walter E. A Coptic Dictionary.

Oxford: Clarendon, 1939.

Czermak, Wilhelm. “Vom großen Gedanken

Ägyptens.” Archiv für ägyptische

Archäologie 1 (1938): 205–14.

———. “Zur Gliederung des 1. Kapitels des

ägyptischen ‘Totenbuches.’” ZÄS 76

(1940): 9–24.

Daressy, George. “Les formes du soleil aux

différentes heures de la journée.” ASAE

17 (1917): 197–208.

———. “Monuments d’Edfou datant du

Moyen Empire.” ASAE 18 (1919): 49–

52.

———. “Notes et remarques.” RT 20

(1898): 72–86.

———. “Notes et remarques.” RT 24

(1902): 160–67.

———. “Notes sur les XXIIe, XXIIIe, et

XXIVe dynasties.” RT 35 (1913): 129–

50.

———. “Statues de basse époque du Musée de Gizèh.” RT 15 (1893): 150–62.

Daumas, François. “Les propylées du temple

d’Hathor à Philae et le culte de la

déesse.” ZÄS 95 (1968): 1–17.

———. “Sur trois représentations de Nout à

Dendara.” ASAE 51 (1951): 373–400.

Davies, Norman de Garis, Rock Cut Tombs

of El Amarna. London: Archaeological

Survey of Egypt, 1908.

Dawson, Warren R. “Notes on Egyptian

Magic.” Aegyptus 11 (1930–31): 23–

28.

Deér, József. “Der Globus des

spätrömischen und des byzantinischen

Kaisers: Symbole oder Insigne?”

Byzantinische Zeitschrift 54 (1961):

53–85, 291–318.

Delpech-Laborie, Jean. “L’aura humaine et

le ka égyptien.” CdE 19 (1944): 62–67.

Derchain, Philippe. “La couronne de la

justification: Essai d’analyse d’un rite ptolémaïque.” CdE 30 (1955): 225–87.

———. “Le demiurge et la balance.” In

REHR, 31–34.

———. Le Papyrus Salt 825 (B.M. 10051):

Rituel pour la conservation de la vie

en Égypte, 2 vols. Mémoires of the

Académie Royale de Belgique, 2nd ser.,

58.1a–b. Brussels: Palais des

Académies, 1965.

———. Review of Egyptian Festivals:

Enactments of Religious Renewal, by

Claas J. Bleeker. CdE 44 (1969): 78–

82.

———. Rites égyptiens I: Le sacrifice de

l’oryx. Brussels: FERE, 1962.

———. “Poissons, tabous et transformations

du mort: Nouvelles conditions sur les

pélerinages aux villes saintes.” Kêmi 13

(1954): 33–42.

Devauchelle, Didier. “A propos du papyrus

de Genève D 229.” Enchoria 8/2

(1978): 73–75.

Devéria, Théodule. “L’expression màâ-

xerou. ” RT 1 (1870): 10–18. Reprinted in Mémoires et fragments, ed. Gaston

Maspero, 2:281–95. BE 5. Paris:

Leroux, 1897.

———. “Le fer et l’aimant: Leur nom et leur

usage dans l’ancienne Égypte.” In

Mémoires et fragments, ed. Gaston

Maspero, 2:339–56. BE 5. Paris:

Leroux, 1897.

Diels, Hermann, and Walther Kranz. Die

Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. Berlin:

Weidmann, 1951.

Dinsmoor, William B. “Archaeology and

Astronomy.” Proceedings of the

American Philosophical Society 80

(1939): 95–173.

Dittmann, Karl H. “Der Segelwagen von

Medînet Mâdi.” MDAIK 10 (1941): 60–

78.

Dolzani, Claudia. “Soda e incenso nei Testi

delle Piramidi.” Aegyptus 48 (1968):

5–18.

Dombart, Theodor. “Der Zweitürmige

Tempel-Pylon altägyptischer Baukunst

und seine religiöse Symbolik.”

Egyptian Religion 1 (1933): 87–98.

Donner, Herbert. “Elemente ägyptischen

Totenglaubens bei den aramäern

Ägyptens.” In REHR, 35–44.

Drioton, Étienne. “Amon, refuge du coeur.”

ZÄS 79 (1954): 3–11.

———. “Ce que l’on sait du théâtre

égyptien.” Revue du Caire 1 (1938):

211–22, 294–308.

———. “Contributions à l’étude du chapitre

CXXV du Livre des Morts: Les

confessions négatives.” In Recueil

d’études égyptologiques, 545–64.

———. “Les dédicaces de Ptolémée

Évergète II sur le deuxième pylône de Karnak.” ASAE 44 (1944): 111–62.

———. “Description sommaire des

chapelles funéraires de la VIe Dynastie

récemment découvertes derrière le

mastaba de Mérérouka à Sakkarah.”

ASAE 43 (1943): 487–513.

———. “Deux cryptogrammes de

Senenmout.” ASAE 38 (1938): 231–46.

———. “L’écriture énigmatique du Livre du

Jour et de la Nuit.” In Le Livre du Jour

et de la Nuit, by Alexandre Piankoff,

83–121. Bibliothèque d’étude 13.

Cairo: IFAO, 1942.

———. “Portes de l’hades et portes du

paradis.” Bulletin de la Société

d’archéologie copte 9 (1943): 59–78.

———. Review of The Egyptian Coffin

Texts, vol. 4, by Adriaan de Buck. BiOr 10 (1953): 167–71.

———. “Le roi défunt, Thot et la crue du

Nil.” Egyptian Religion 1 (1933): 39–

51.

———. “Une statue prophylactique de

Ramsès III.” ASAE 39 (1939): 57–89.

———. Le texte dramatique d’Edfou.

ASAE Supplement 11. Cairo: IFAO,

1948.

Drioton, Étienne, and Jacques Vandier.

L’Égypte: Dès origines à la conquête

d’Alexandre. Paris: Presses

Universitaires de France, 1938.

Drower, Ethel S. Stevens, trans. and ed. The

Canonical Prayerbook of the

Mandaeans. Leiden: Brill, 1959.

———. “The Cult-Hut or Mandi of the

Mandaeans.” Ancient Egypt and the

East, n.v. (1934): 39–48.

———. The Mandaeans of Iraq and Iran:

Their Cults, Customs, Magic, Legends,

and Folklore. Leiden: Brill, 1962.

———. “The Ritual Meal.” Folk-Lore 48/3

(1937): 226–44.

von Duhn, Friedrich. “Rot und Tot.” Archiv

für Religionswissenschaft 9 (1906): 1–

24.

Dümichen, Johannes. Der Grabpalast des

Patuamenap in der Thebanischen

Nekropolis. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1884.

Dupont, Jacques. Béatitudes’ égyptiennes.”

Biblica 47 (1966): 185–222.

Ebeling, Erich. “Eine Beschwörung der

Gattung Ušburruda.” Or 22 (1953):

358–61.

———. Tod und Leben nach den

Vorstellungen der Babylonier. Leipzig:

de Gruyter, 1931.

Eckenstein, Lina. “The God Sopt.” Ancient

Egypt (1917): 103–8.

Edel, Elmar. Das Akazienhaus und seine

Rolle in den Begräbnisriten des alten

Ägyptens. Münchner ägyptologische

Studien 24. Berlin: Hessling, 1970.

Edwards, I. E. S. The Pyramids of Egypt.

3rd ed. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1985.

Eisler, Robert. Iēsous basileus ou

basileusas. 2 vols.

Religionswissenschaftliche Bibliothek

9. Heidelberg: Winter, 1929–30.

Eliade, Mircea. “L’initiation et le monde

moderne.” In Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 1–

14.

Emery, Walter B. “Preliminary Report on the

Excavations at North Saqqâra, 1969–

70.” JEA 57 (1971): 3–13.

Entwistle, William J. Aspects of Language.

London: Faber and Faber, 1953.

Erlenmeyer, M.-L., and H. Erlenmeyer.

“Über Schlangen-Darstellungen in der

frühen Bildkunst des alten Orients.” AfO

23 (1970): 52–62.

Erman, Adolf. Eine ägyptische Quelle der

“Sprüche Salomos,” 86–93.

Sitzungsberichte der preussischen

Akademie der Wissenschaften,

Philosophisch-historische Klasse 15.

Berlin: Preussischen Akademie der

Wissenschaften, 1924.

———. Die ägyptische Religion. Berlin:

Reimer, 1905.

———. The Ancient Egyptians: A

Sourcebook of Their Writings. Trans.

Aylward M. Blackman. New York:

Harper and Row, 1966.

———. Der Leidener Amonshymnus.

Sitzungsberichte der preussischen

Akademie der Wissenschaften,

Philosophisch-historischen Klasse 11.

Berlin: Preussischen Akademie der

Wissenschaften, 1923.

———. Literarische Texte des Mittleren

Reiches. 2 vols. Hieratische Papyrus

aus den Königlichen Museen zu Berlin

4–5. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1908–9.

———, ed. Die Märchen des Papyrus

Westcar. Berlin: Spemann, 1890.

———. Mein Werden und mein Wirken:

Erinnerungen eines alten berliner

Gelehrten. Leipzig: Quelle and Meyer,

1929.

———. Neuägyptische Grammatik. 2nd ed.

Leipzig: Engelmann, 1933.

———. “Zum Namen des Osiris.” ZÄS 46

(1909): 92–95.

Erman, Adolf, and Hermann Grapow.

Wörterbuch der ägyptischen Sprache.

7 vols. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1926–63.

The Facsimile Edition of the Nag Hammadi

Codices. 12 vols. Leiden: Brill, 1974–

84.

Fairman, Herbert W. “The Myth of Horus at

Edfu—I.” JEA 21 (1935): 26–36.

———. “A Scene of the Offering of Truth in

the Temple of Edfu.” MDAIK 16 (1958):

86–92.

Faulkner, Raymond O. The Ancient Egyptian

Pyramid Texts. Oxford: Clarendon, 1969.

———. “The Bremner-Rhind Papyrus—I.”

JEA 22 (1936): 121–40.

———. “The Bremner-Rhind Papyrus—II.”

JEA 23 (1937): 10–16.

———. “The ‘Cannibal Hymn’ from the

Pyramid Texts.” JEA 10 (1924): 97–

103.

———. A Concise Dictionary of Middle

Egyptian. Oxford: Griffith Institute,

1962.

———. The Papyrus Bremner-Rhind

(British Museum No. 10188).

Bibliotheca Aegyptiaca 3. Brussels:

FERE, 1933.

———. “The Pregnancy of Isis.” JEA 54

(1968): 40–44.

———. “Some Further Remarks on the

Transcription of Late Hieratic.” JEA 21

(1935): 49–51.

Fecht, Gerhard. “Ägyptische Zweifel am Sinn des Opfers.” ZÄS 100 (1973): 6–

16.

Federn, Walter. “The ‘Transformations’ in

the Coffin Texts: A New Approach.”

JNES 19 (1960): 241–57.

Fitzmyer, Joseph A. The Genesis

Apocryphon of Qumran Cave I: A

Commentary. Biblica et orientalia 18.

Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute,

1966.

Flusser, David. “Qumran und die Zwölf.” In

Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 134–46.

Ford, J. Massingberd. “The Jewel of

Discernment: A Study of Stone

Symbolism.” Biblische Zeitschrift 11

(1967): 109–16.

———. “Thou Art ‘Abraham’ and upon This

Rock….” Heythrop Journal 6 (1965):

289–301.

Förester, Theodor. “Cyril of Jerusalem.” In

The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge, ed. Samuel

McCauley Jackson et al. 15 vols. 1950.

Reprint, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker,

1977.

Foucart, George. “La belle fête de la

vallée.” BIFAO 24 (1924): 1–148.

———. Review of The Book of the Dead,

by E. A. Wallis Budge. Sphinx 14

(1910–11): 53–69.

———. “Sur un des livres du rituel

funéraire.” Sphinx 14 (1910–11): 89–

122.

Fraenkel, Meir. “Zur Deutung von Medina

‘Bezirk, Staat.’” Zeitschrift für die

alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 77

(1965): 215.

Frankfort, Henri. Ancient Egyptian Religion.

1948. Reprint, New York: Harper,

1961.

———. The Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos. 2

vols. Memoir 39. London: Egypt

Exploration Society, 1933.

———. Kingship and the Gods: A Study of

Ancient Near Eastern Religion as the

Integration of Society and Nature.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1948.

———. “Pyramid Temples and the Religion

of the Old Kingdom.” BiOr 10 (1953):

157–62.

Frey, J. B. “La vie de l’au-delà dans les

conceptions juives au temps de Jésus-

Christ.” Biblica 13 (1932): 129–68.

Friedlander, Gerald. Pirḳê de Rabbi Eliezer.

2nd ed. New York: Hermon, 1965.

Fuller, Richard Buckminster. Intuition.

Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1972.

Gaballa, Gaballa A., and Kenneth A.

Kitchen. “The Festival of Sokar.” Or 38

(1969): 1–76.

Gardiner, Alan H. Ancient Egyptian

Onomastica. 2 vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1947.

———. “The Baptism of Pharaoh.” JEA 36

(1950): 3–12.

———. “The Coronation of King

Ḥaremḥab.” JEA 39 (1953): 13–31.

———. “Davies’s Copy of the Great Speos

Artemidos Inscription.” JEA 32 (1946):

43–56.

———. Egyptian Grammar: Being an

Introduction to the Study of

Hieroglyphs. 3rd rev. ed. Oxford:

Oxford University Press, 1966.

———. Egypt of the Pharaohs. Oxford:

Oxford University Press, 1961.

———. “The Eloquent Peasant.” JEA 9

(1923): 5–25.

———. “The Geography of the Exodus.” In

Recueil d’études égyptologiques, 203–

15.

———. “The Goddess Nekhbet at the

Jubilee Festival of Rameses III.” ZÄS

48 (1910): 47–51.

———. Hieratic Papyri in the British

Museum: Third Series: Chester Beatty

Gift. 2 vols. London: British Museum,

1935.

———. “Horus the Beḥdetite.” JEA 30

(1944): 23–60.

———. “The House of Life.” JEA 24

(1938): 157–79.

———. “Hymns to Amon from a Leiden

Papyrus.” ZÄS 42 (1905): 12–42.

———. “Inscriptions from the Tomb of Si-

renpowet I., Prince of Elephantine.”

ZÄS 45 (1908): 123–40.

———. Late-Egyptian Stories. Brussels:

FERE, 1932.

———. The Library of A. Chester Beatty:

Description of a Hieratic Papyrus with

a Mythological Story, Love-Songs, and

Other Miscellaneous Texts: The

Chester Beatty Papyri, No. 1. London: Oxford University Press, 1931.

———. The Temple of King Sethos I at

Abydos. Inscriptions copied by Amice

M. Calverley and Myrtle F. Broome. 4

vols. London and Chicago: Egyptian

Exploration Society and University of

Chicago Press, 1933–59.

———. “Two Hieroglyphic Signs and the

Egyptian Words for ‘Alabaster’ and

‘Linen,’ etc.” BIFAO 30 (1931): 161–

83.

Garnot, Jean Sainte Fare. Religions

égyptiennes antiques: Bibliographie

analytique, 1939–43. Paris: Presses

universitaires de France, 1952.

Gärtner, Bertil E. The Temple and the

Community in Qumran and the New

Testament: A Comparative Study in the

Temple Symbolism of the Qumran Texts

and the New Testament. Society for

New Testament Studies 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1965.

Gaster, Theodor H. Thespis: Ritual, Myth

and Drama in the Ancient Near East.

New and rev. ed. New York: Harper

and Row, 1966.

Gauthier, Henri. “Un pilier ( djed) au Musée du Caire.” ASAE 35 (1935): 81–96.

Giamberardini, Gabriele. “La croce e il

crocifisso presso i copti.” Studia

Orientalia Christiana 7 (1962): 45–

100.

Gilbert, Pierre. “Autour du pylône de

Khonsou.” CdE 23 (1948): 17–21.

———. “Les idées des noms solaires

royaux à l’Ancien Empire.” CdE 11

(1936): 255–65.

Ginzberg, Louis. The Legends of the Jews.

Trans. Henrietta Szold et al. 7 vols.

Philadelphia: Jewish Publication

Society of America, 1937–66.

Girard, L. Saint-Paul. “Un fragment de liturgie magique copte sur ostrakon.”

ASAE 27 (1927): 62–68.

Glanville, S. R. K., ed. Studies Presented to

F. Ll. Griffith. London: Egyptian

Exploration Society and Oxford

University Press, 1932.

Goldschmidt, Lazarus. Der babylonische

Talmud. 7 vols. The Hague: Nijoff,

1933–35.

Goodenough, Erwin R. Jewish Symbols in

the Greco-Roman Period. 13 vols. New

York: Pantheon, 1953–68.

Gothein, Marie. “Die Todsünden.” Archiv

für Religionswissenschaft 10 (1907):

416–84.

Goyon, Georges. “Les travaux de Chou et les

tribulations de Geb d’après le Naos

2248 d’Ismaïlia.” Kêmi 6 (1936): 1–42.

Goyon, Jean-Claude. “Le cérémonial pour

faire sortir Sokaris: Papyrus Louvre I.

3079, col. 112–14.” RdE 20 (1968): 63–96.

———. Le Papyrus du Louvre N. 3279.

Bibliothèque d’étude 42. Cairo: IFAO,

1966.

Grapow, Hermann. “Ägyptische

Jenseitswünsche in Sprüchen

ungewöhnlicher Fassung aus dem Neuen

Reich.” ZÄS 77 (1942): 57–78.

———. “Die Himmelsgöttin Nut als

Mutterschwein.” ZÄS 71 (1935): 45–47.

———. Das 17. Kapitel des ägyptischen

Totenbuches und seine

religionsgeschichtliche Bedeutung.

Berlin: Paul, 1912.

Graves, Robert. The Greek Myths. 2 vols.

Baltimore: Penguin, 1955.

Grdseloff, Bernhard. “L’insigne du grand

juge égyptien.” ASAE 40 (1940): 185–

202.

———. “Nouvelles données concernant la

tente de purification.” ASAE 51 (1951): 129–40.

Grenfell, Alice. “The Ka on Scarabs.” RT 37

(1915): 77–93.

Grenfell, Bernard P., and Arthur S. Hunt,

eds. The Oxyrhynchus Papyri. London:

Egypt Exploration Fund, 1898.

Grieshammer, Reinhard. Das

Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten. ÄA

20. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1970.

Griffith, Francis Ll. “Herodotus II.90:

Apotheosis by Drowning.” ZÄS 46

(1909): 132–34.

———. Stories of the High Priests of

Memphis: The Sethon of Herodotus

and the Demotic Tales of Khamuas.

Oxford: Clarendon, 1900.

Griffiths, J. Gwyn. “Remarks on the

Mythology of the Eyes of Horus.” CdE

33 (1958): 182–93.

———. “The Tradition of Allegory in

Egypt.” In REHR, 45–57.

Guilmot, Max. “Les lettres aux morts dans

l’Égypte ancienne.” RHR 170 (1966):

1–27.

———. “La signification des

métamorphoses du défunt en Égypte

ancienne.” RHR 175 (1969): 5–16.

Gundlach, Rolf, and Wolfgang Schenkel.

“M.A.A.T.: Eine System zur

lexikalischen und grammatischen

Erschliessung altägyptischer Texte mit

Hilfe einer elektronischen

Datenverarbeitungsanlage

(Projektbeschreibung).” CdE 42 (1967):

41–64.

Gunn, Battiscombe. “Notes on the Aten and

His Names.” JEA 9 (1923): 168–76.

Gurney, Oliver R. “Hittite Kingship.” In

Myth, Ritual, and Kingship, ed. Samuel

H. Hooke, 105–21.

Haavio, Martti. Heilige Haine in

Ingermanland. Folklore Fellows Communications 189. Helsinki:

Academia Scientiarum Fennica, 1963.

Habachi, Labib. “Edjo, Mistress of Nebt.”

ZÄS 90 (1963): 41–49.

Hall, H. R. “The Bronze Statuette of

Khonserdaisu in the British Museum.”

JEA 16 (1930): 1–2.

———. Review of De Egyptische

Voorstellingen betreffende den

Oerheuvel, by Adriaan de Buck. JEA 10

(1924): 185–87.

Harl, Marguérite. “From Glory to Glory.” In

Kyriakon: Festschrift Johannes

Quasten, ed. Patrick Granfield and

Josef A. Jungmann, 2:730–35. Münster:

Aschendorff, 1970.

Harris, J. Rendel. The Odes and Psalms of

Solomon. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1909.

Hassan, Selim Bey. “A Representation of the

Solar Disk with Human Hands and

Arms and the Form of Horus of Beḥdet,

as Seen on the Stela of Amenhetep IInd

in the Mud-Brick Temple at Giza.”

ASAE 38 (1938): 53–61.

Haupt, Paul. “Crystal-Gazing in the Old

Testament.” JBL 36 (1917): 84–92.

Hawkins, Gerald S. Stonehenge Decoded.

Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965.

Helck, Wolfgang. “Die Bedeutung der

ägyptischen Besucherinschriften.”

ZDMG 102 (1952): 39–46.

———. “Bemerkungen zum Ritual des

Dramatischen Ramesseumspapyrus.” Or

23 (1954): 383–411.

———. “Die Herkunft des abydenischen

Osirisrituals.” ArOr 20 (1952): 72–85.

———. “Nilhöhe und Jubiläumsfest.” ZÄS

93 (1966): 74–79.

———. “Ramessidische Inschriften aus

Karnak.” ZÄS 82 (1958): 98–140.

———. Die Ritualszenen auf der Umfassungsmauer Ramses’ II. in

Karnak. 2 vols. ÄA 18. Wiesbaden:

Harrassowitz, 1968.

Helck, Wolfgang, and Eberhard Otto.

Lexikon der Ägyptologie. 7 vols.

Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1975–92.

Hempel, Johannes. Heilung als Symbol und

Wirklichkeit im biblischen Schrifttum,

237–314. Nachrichten der Akademie

der Wissenschaften in Göttingen,

Philologisch-historische Klasse 1958.3.

Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht,

1958.

Hennecke, Edgar, and Wilhelm

Schneemelcher, eds. and trans.

Neutestamentliche Apokryphen in

deutscher Übersetzung. 3rd ed. 2 vols.

Tübingen: Mohr, 1959–64. English

translation: New Testament Apocrypha.

2 vols. Ed. Robert McLachlan Wilson.

Trans. J. B. Higgins et al. Philadelphia: Westminster, 1963–65.

Hentze, Carl. Mythes et symboles lunaires:

Chine ancienne, civilisations

anciennes de l’Asie, peuples

limitrophes du Pacifique. Anvers:

Sikkel, 1932.

Herbin, François R. Le livre de parcourir

l’eternite. Leuven: Peeters, 1994.

Hermann, Alfred. “Zergliedern und

Zusammenfügen:

Religionsgeschichtliches zur

Mumifizierung.” Numen 3 (1956): 81–

96.

Herrmann, Siegfried. “Steuerruder, Waage,

Herz und Zunge in ägyptischen

Bildreden.” ZÄS 79 (1954): 106–15.

Heward, Grant S., and Jerald Tanner. “The

Joseph Smith Egyptian Papyri:

Translations and Interpretations: The

Source of the Book of Abraham

Identified.” Dialogue 3/2 (1968): 92–

98.

Hilprecht, Hermann V. The Earliest Version

of the Babylonian Deluge Story and the

Temple Library of Nippur. Babylonian

Expedition of the University of

Pennsylvania, Series D: Researches and

Treatises 5.1. Philadelphia: University

of Pennsylvania, 1910.

Hoens, D. J. “Initiation in Later Hinduism

according to Tantric Texts.” In

Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 71–80.

Hoffmann, Gustav. “Zwei Hymnen der

Thomasakten.” Zeitschrift für die

neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 4

(1903): 273–309.

Hoffmann, Konrad. Die theophoren

Personennamen des älteren Ägyptens.

Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1915. Reprinted

1917 in UGAÄ 7.

Holmberg, Maj Sandman. The God Ptah.

Lund: Gleerup, 1946.

Hölscher, Uvo. “Erscheinungsfenster und

Erscheinungsbalkon im königlichen

Palast.” ZÄS 67 (1931): 43–51.

Hommel, Fritz. Ethnologie und Geographie

des alten Orients. Munich: Beck, 1926.

Hooke, Samuel H. Myth, Ritual, and

Kingship: Essays on the Theory and

Practice of Kingship in the Ancient

Near East and in Israel. Oxford:

Clarendon, 1958.

Hopfner, Theodor. Fontes historiae

religionis aegyptiacae. Fontes historiae

religionum ex auctoribus graecis et

latinis collectos 2.1–5. Bonn: Marcus

and Weber, 1922.

———. Plutarch über Isis und Osiris. 2

vols. Monographien des Archiv

Orientální 9. Prague: Orientalisches

Institut, 1940–41.

Hornung, Erik. Altägyptische

Höllenvorstellungen. Abhandlungen der Sächsischen Akademie der

Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,

Philologisch-historische Klasse 59.3.

Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1968.

———. Das Amduat: Die Schrift des

verborgenen Raumes. 3 vols. ÄA 7 and

13. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1963–67.

———. Conceptions of God in Ancient

Egypt: The One and the Many. Trans.

John Baines. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell

University Press, 1982.

———. Der Eine und die Vielen:

Ägyptische Gottesvorstellungen.

Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche

Buchgesellschaft, 1971.

———. Geschichte als Fest: Zwei Vorträge

zum Geschichtsbild der frühen

Menschheit. Darmstadt:

Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft,

1966.

———. “Politische Planung und Realität im alten Ägypten.” Saeculum 22 (1971):

48–58.

———. Review of The Origins of Osiris,

by J. Gwyn Griffiths. OLZ 65 (1970):

17–20.

Horodezky, S. A. “Michael und Gabriel.”

Monatsschrift für Geschichte und

Wissenschaft des Judentums 72 (1928):

499–506.

de Horrack, Philippe-Jacques. “Le Livre des

Respirations d’après les manuscrits du

musée du Louvre.” In Oeuvres diverses,

ed. Philippe Virey and Gaston Maspero,

109–37. BE 17. Paris: Leroux, 1907.

Housman, A. E. “Could Man Be Drunk For

Ever.” In Last Poems, 26. London:

Richards, 1922.

James, Montague R., trans. and ed. The

Apocryphal New Testament. Corrected

ed. Oxford: Clarendon, 1953.

Jastrow, Marcus. A Dictionary of the Targumim, the Talmud Babli and

Yerushalmi, and the Midrashic

Literature. 2 vols. New York: Pardes,

1950.

Jelinková, E. A. E. See E. A. E. Reymond.

Jellinek, Adolph, ed. Bait ha-Midrash. 6

vols. in 2. 1853–77. Reprint, Jerusalem:

Wahrmann, 1967.

Jéquier, Gustave. “À propos d’une stèle

éthiopienne.” RT 27 (1905): 170–75.

———. Considérations sur les religions

égyptiennes. Neuchâtel: Baconnière,

1946.

———. “L’équipage primitif de la barque

solaire d’Héliopolis.” Egyptian

Religion 3 (1935): 18–26.

———. Les frises d’objets des

sarcophages du Moyen Empire. MIFAO

47. Cairo: IFAO, 1921.

———. “Matériaux pour servir à

l’établissement d’un dictionnaire d’archéologie égyptienne.” BIFAO 19

(1922): 1–271.

Jeremias, Joachim. “Der Eckstein.” Angelos

1 (1925): 65–70.

Jessee, Dean C. “The Kirtland Diary of

Wilford Woodruff.” BYU Studies 12/4

(1972): 365–99.

de Jonge, Marinus. The Testaments of the

Twelve Patriarchs: A Study of Their

Text, Composition and Origin. Assen:

Van Gorcum, 1953.

Junker, Hermann. Der Auszug der Hathor-

Tefnut aus Nubien. Berlin: Akademie

der Wissenschaften, 1911.

———. “Bedeutung und Symbolik der

steinernen Becken in den Gräbern des

Alten Reichs.” ArOr 20 (1952): 185–

89.

———. Das Götterdekret über das Abaton.

Denkschriften der Kaiserliche

Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Philosophisch-historische Klasse 56.

Vienna: Hölder, 1913.

———. Die Götterlehre von Memphis

( Schabaka-Inschrift). Abhandlungen

der Preussischen Akademie der

Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-

historische Klasse 23. Berlin:

Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1940.

———. Handlung’ als Präfix in

Zusammensetzungen.” ZÄS 77 (1941):

3–7.

———. Die Onurislegende. Denkschriften

der Kaiserliche Akademie der

Wissenschaften in Wien, Philosophisch-

historische Klasse, 59.1–2. Vienna:

Hölder, 1917.

———. “Die Osirisreligion und der

Erlösungsgedanke bei den Ägyptern.” In

Internationale Woche für Religions-

Ethnologie. Paris: Geuthner, 1926.

———. Die politische Lehre von Memphis.

Abhandlungen der Preussischen

Akademie der Wissenschaften,

Philosophisch-historische Klasse 6.

Berlin: Akademie der Wissenschaften,

1941.

———. Pyramidenzeit: Das Wesen der

altägyptischen Religion. Zürich:

Benziger, 1949.

———. Die Stundenwachen in den

Osirismysterien nach den Inschriften

von Dendera, Edfu und Philae.

Denkschriften der Kaiserliche

Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien,

Philosophisch-historische Klasse 54.

Vienna: Hölder, 1910.

Kaiser, Werner. Review of Die

Geisteshaltung der Ägypter in der

Frühzeit, by Hermann Junker. OLZ 58

(1963): 340–44.

Kákosy, László. “Ideas about the Fallen State

of the World in Egyptian Religion: Decline of the Golden Age.” Acta

Orientalia 17 (1964): 205–16.

———. “Probleme der ägyptischen

Jenseitsvorstellungen in der Ptolemäer-

und Kaiserzeit.” In REHR, 59–68.

———. Review of Le papyrus magique

illustré de Brooklyn, by Serge

Sauneron. BiOr 29 (1972): 28–29.

———. “Selige und Verdammte in der

spätägyptischen Religion.” ZÄS 97

(1971): 95–106.

———. “Zu einer Etymologie von Philä:

Die ‘Insel der Zeit.’” Acta Antiqua 16

(1968): 39–48.

Karge, Paul. Rephaim: Die

vorgeschichtliche Kultur Palästinas

und Phöniziens. Paderborn: Schöningh,

1917.

Kees, Hermann. Ägypten. Vol. 10 of

Religionsgeschichtliches Lesebuch, ed.

Alfred Bertholet. Tübingen: Mohr, 1928.

———. Ägypten. Vol. 1 of Kulturgeschichte

des alten Orients. Handbuch der

Altertumswissenschaft 3.1.3. Munich:

Beck, 1933.

———. Apotheosis by Drowning.’” In

Studies Presented to F. Ll. Griffith, ed.

Glanville, 402–5.

———. Farbensymbolik in ägyptischen

religiösen Texten, 413–79 . Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in

Göttingen, Philologisch-historische

Klasse 1943.11. Göttingen:

Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1943.

———. “Die Feuerinsel in den Sargtexten

und im Totenbuch.” ZÄS 78 (1942): 41–

53.

———. Der Götterglaube im alten

Ägypten. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1941.

———. Göttinger Totenbuchstudien

(Totenbuch Kapitel 69 und 70). UGAÄ

17. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1954.

———. Pr-dwȝt’ und ‘dbȝt.’” RT 36 (1914):

1–16.

———. Totenglauben und

Jenseitsvorstellungen der alten

Ägypter: Grundlagen und Entwicklung

bis zum Ende des mittleren Reiches.

Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1926.

Keimer, Ludwig. “L’arbre ṮR·T est-il

réellement le saule égyptien.” BIFAO 31

(1931): 177–237.

———. “Pendeloques en forme d’insectes

faisant partie de colliers égyptiens.”

ASAE 31 (1931): 145–86; 32 (1932):

129–50; 33 (1933): 97–130, 193–200.

———. “Quelques remarques sur la huppe

( Upupa epops) dans l’Égypte

ancienne.” BIFAO 30 (1931): 305–31.

———. Remarques sur le tatouage dans

l’Égypte ancienne. Mémoires de

l’Institut d’Égypte 53. Cairo: IFAO, 1948.

———. “Sur un bas-relief en calcaire

représentant la déesse dans le sycomore

et la déesse dans le dattier.” ASAE 29

(1929): 81–88.

Kerényi, Karl. “Voraussetzungen der

Einweihung in Eleusis.” In Initiation,

ed. Bleeker, 59–64.

Khayyám, Omar. Rubáiyát. Trans. Edward

Fitzgerald. Garden City, N.Y.: Garden

City Books, 1952.

Kirkham, Francis W. “The Manner of

Translating the Book of Mormon.” IE

42, October 1939, 630–31.

———. A New Witness for Christ in

America. Salt Lake City: Utah Printing,

1967.

Kitchen, Kenneth A. Review of Aufbau und

Bedeutung der altägyptischen

Opferformel, by Winfried Barta. Or 41

(1972): 129–32.

Klijn, Albertus F. J., ed. The Acts of

Thomas. Supplement to Novum

Testamentum 5. Leiden: Brill, 1962.

Koch, Klaus. Ratlos vor der Apokalyptik.

Gütersloh: Mohn, 1970.

———. “Wort und Einheit des

Schöpfergottes in Memphis und

Jerusalem: Zur Einzigartigkeit Israels.”

Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche 62

(1965): 251–93.

Kohler, K. “The Pre-Talmudic Haggada, II.”

JQR, o.s., 7 (1894–95): 581–606.

Köster, August. “Zur ägyptischen

Pflanzensäule.” ZÄS 39 (1901): 138–43.

Kramer, Samuel N. “Gilgamesh and the Land

of the Living.” Journal of Cuneiform

Studies 1 (1947): 3–46.

———. The Sumerians: Their History,

Culture, and Character. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1963.

Krauss, S. “Note sur le nom divin de vingt-deux lettres et sur le démon de l’oubli.”

Revue des études juives 56 (1908):

251–54.

Kristensen, W. Brede. Het leven uit de

dood: Studien over Egyptische en oud-

Griekse godsdienst. 2nd ed. Haarlem:

Bohn, 1949.

Kuentz, Charles. “Autour d’une conception

égyptienne méconnue: L’ akhit ou soi-

disant horizon.” BIFAO 17 (1920): 121–

90.

Labib, Pahor, and Mahaf al-Qibti

(Antiquities Department). Coptic

Gnostic Papyri in the Coptic Museum

at Old Cairo. Vol. 1. Cairo: Government

Press, 1956.

Labourt, Jérôme-Dominique-Raymond, and

Pierre Batiffol, eds. and trans. Les Odes

de Salomon. Paris: Gabalde-Lecoffre,

1911.

de Labriolle, Pierre. “Refrigerium.” Bulletin d’ancienne littérature et d’archéologie

chrétiennes 2 (1912): 214–19.

Lacau, Pierre. “Sur la reine Hatshepsēwe.”

RHR 143 (1953): 1–7.

Lambert, Wilfred G. “New Light on the

Babylonian Flood.” Journal of Semitic

Studies 5 (1960): 113–23.

Lange, Hans O. “Der Ägypter.” In Lehrbuch

der religionsgeschichte, ed. Pierre D.

Chantepie de la Saussaye, Alfred

Bertholet, and Edvard Lehmann, 1:423–

95. 2 vols. 4th ed. Tübingen: Mohr,

1925.

Lange, Hans O., and Otto Neugebauer.

Papyrus Carlsberg No. I: Ein

hieratisch-demotischer kosmologischer

Text. Kongelige danske videnskabernes

Selskab, historisk-filologiske Skrifter

1.2. Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1940.

Lanzone, Ridolfo V. Dizionario di mitologia

egizia. 5 vols. in 3. Turin: Doyen, 1881–85.

Lassally, Oswald. “Amulette und

Tätowierungen in Ägypten.” Archiv für

Religionswissenschaft 29 (1931): 130–

38.

Layton, Bentley. The Gnostic Scriptures: A

New Translation with Annotations and

Introductions. Garden City, N.Y.:

Doubleday, 1987.

Leclant, Jean. “Fouilles et travaux en Égypte,

1950–1951.” Or 20 (1951): 453–75.

Leclerq, Henri. “Main.” In Dictionnaire

d’archéologie chrétienne et de liturgie,

ed. Fernand Cabrol and Henri Leclercq,

10:1205–19. Paris: Letouzey et Ané,

1907–53.

van der Leeuw, Gerardus. “Das neuentdeckte

Osirisheiligtum in Abydos und das

sogenannte Natatorium der Villa

Adriana.” Archiv für

Religionswissenschaft 19 (1916–19): 544–46.

———. “The SUMBOLA [ Symbola] in

Firmicus Maternus.” Egyptian Religion

1 (1933): 61–72.

Lefébure, Eugène. “Le Cham et l’Adam

égyptiens.” Transactions of the Society

of Biblical Archaeology 9 (1893): 167–

94.

———. “Un chapitre de la chronique

solaire.” ZÄS 21 (1883): 27–33.

———. Les hypogées royaux de Thèbes. 3

vols. MIFAO 2–3. Paris: Leroux, 1886–

89.

———. “L’importance du nom chez les

égyptiens.” In Oeuvres diverses, ed.

Gaston Maspero, 3:47–67. BE 36.

Paris: Leroux, 1915.

———. “Le paradis égyptien.” In Oeuvres

diverses, ed. Gaston Maspero, 3:305–

36. BE 36. Paris: Leroux, 1915.

———. “Le sacrifice humaine d’après les rites de Busiris et d’Abydos.” In

Oeuvres diverses, ed. Gaston Maspero,

3:269–304. BE 36. Paris: Leroux, 1915.

———. “La vertu et la vie du nom en

Égypte.” In Oeuvres diverses, ed.

Gaston Maspero, 3:95–126. BE 36.

Paris: Leroux, 1915.

Lefebvre, Gustave. “Un conte égyptien:

Vérité et Mensonge.” RdE 4 (1940):

15–25.

———. “L’oeuf divin d’Hermopolis.” ASAE

23 (1923): 65–67.

———. “Une table eucharistique.” ASAE 25

(1925): 160–62.

———. “Textes du tombeau de Petosiris.”

ASAE 20 (1920): 207–36; 21 (1921):

40–60, 145–62, 222–46; 22 (1922): 33–

48, 139–56.

———. Le tombeau de Petosiris. 3 vols.

Cairo: IFAO, 1923–24.

Legrain, Georges. “Second rapport sur les travaux exécutés à Karnak du 31 octobre

1901 au 15 mai 1902.” ASAE 4 (1903):

1–40.

———. Les temples de Karnak. Brussels:

Vromant, 1929.

Lepsius, Richard. Älteste Texte des

Todtenbuches nach Sarkophagen des

altägyptischen Reichs im Berliner

Museum. Berlin: Hertz, 1867.

———. Denkmäler aus Ägypten und

Äthiopien. 5 vols. in 2 plus

supplementary vol. Leipzig: Hinrichs,

1897–1913.

———. Das Todtenbuch der Ägypter nach

dem hieroglyphischen Papyrus in

Turin. Leipzig: Wigand, 1842.

Lesko, Leonard H. The Ancient Egyptian

Book of Two Ways. Berkeley: University

of California Press, 1972.

———. “Some Observations on the

Composition of the Book of Two Ways.”

Journal of the American Oriental

Society 91 (1971): 30–43.

Levi, Simeone. Raccolta dei segni ieratici

egizi. Turin: Paravia, 1880.

Lewis, J. S. “Oh, I Had Such a Pretty Dream,

Mamma.” In Deseret Sunday School

Songs. Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday

School Union, 1909, 184.

Lexikon für Theologie und Kirche. Ed.

Michael Buchberger et al. 10 vols.

Freiburg: Herder, 1957–65.

Liddell, Henry G., Robert Scott, et al., A

Greek-English Lexicon. 9th ed. with

supplement. Oxford: Clarendon, 1968.

Lidzbarski, Mark. Ginzā: Der Schatz oder

das grosse Buch der Mandäer.

Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht,

1925.

Lieblein, Jens. Le livre égyptien Que Mon

Nom Fleurisse. Leipzig: Hinrichs,

1895.

Lloyd, Seton. “The First Light on the Bronze

Age Religion of Western Anatolia:

Horned Altar Shrines from Fifteen

Hundred Years of Beycesultan’s

History.” Illustrated London News, 25

January 1958, 146–49.

“Local and Other Matters: The Manti

Temple.” Deseret News, 1 May 1877, 2.

Lohse, Eduard, ed. Die Texte aus Qumran.

Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche

Buchgesellschaft, 1964.

Loret, Victor. “Le champ des Souchets.” RT

13 (1890): 197–201.

———. “Étude sur quelques arbres

égyptiens.” RT 2 (1880): 21–26.

———. “La racine ḫm.” RT 14 (1893): 106–20.

———. “La turquoise chez les anciens

égyptiens.” Kêmi 1 (1928): 99–114.

Löwy, A. “Old Jewish Legends on Biblical

Topics: II.—Legendary Description of Hell.” PSBA 10 (1887–88): 333–42.

Lucas, Alfred. “Efflorescent Salt of Unusual

Composition.” ASAE 17 (1917): 86–88.

———. “The Occurrence of Natron in

Ancient Egypt.” JEA 18 (1932): 62–66.

———. “The Use of Natron by the Ancient

Egyptians in Mummification.” JEA 1

(1914): 119–23.

Lüddeckens, Erich. “Untersuchungen über

religiösen Gehalt, Sprache und Form

der ägyptischen Totenklagen.” MDAIK

11 (1943): 1–188.

Lüddeckens, Erich, and Heinz-Josef Thissen.

Demotisches Namenbuch. 17

Lieferungen. Wiesbaden: Reichert,

1980–2000.

Madsen, Henry. “Die Totenfeier im Garten.”

ZÄS 43 (1906): 51–54.

Madsen, Truman. “Man Illumined.” In To the

Glory of God: Mormon Essays on

Great Issues,” ed. Truman G. Madsen and Charles D. Tate Jr., 121–33. Salt

Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972.

Malaise, Michel. “La pierre nmḥf et son

identification avec le défunt dans le

Livre des Morts.” CdE 48 (1973): 26–

35.

Mariette, Auguste. Catalogue général des

monuments d’Abydos. Paris:

Imprimerie Nationale, 1869–80.

Maspero, Gaston. “Une formule des stèles

funéraires de la XIIe Dynastie.” In

Études de mythologie et d’archéologie

égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero, 1–34.

BE 1. Paris: Leroux, 1893.

———. “Le Livre des Morts.” In Études de

mythologie et d’archéologie

égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero, 325–

87. BE 1. Paris: Leroux, 1893.

———. “Le nom antique de la Grande-

Oasis et les idées qui s’y rattachent.” In

Études de mythologie et d’archéologie égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero,

2:421–27. BE 2. Paris: Leroux, 1893.

———. “Le rituel du sacrifice funéraire.” In

Études de mythologie et d’archéologie

égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero,

1:283–324. BE 1. Paris: Leroux, 1893.

———. “Sur la stèle de l’intronisation

trouvée au Djebel-Barkal.” In Études de

mythologie et d’archéologie

égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero,

3:135–51. BE 7. Paris: Leroux, 1898.

———. “Sur les jardins funéraires.” In

Études de mythologie et d’archéologie

égyptiennes, ed. Gaston Maspero,

4:241–48.

Massoulard, Émile. Préhistoire et

protohistoire d’Égypte. Travaux et

mémoires 53. Paris: Institut

d’ethnologie, 1949.

May, Herbert G. “The Ark—A Miniature

Temple.” American Journal of Semitic Languages and Literatures 52 (1936):

215–34.

Mayassis, S. Mystères et initiations dans la

préhistoire et protohistoire de l’anté-

diluvien à Sumer-Babylone: La

familiarité divine originelle. BAOA 3.

Athens: BAOA, 1961.

———. Mystères et initiations de l’Égypte

ancienne: Compléments à la religion

égyptienne. BAOA 2. Athens: BAOA,

1957.

Maystre, Charles. “Le Livre de la Vache du

Ciel dans les tombeaux de la vallée des

Rois.” BIFAO 40 (1941): 53–115.

Mehauden, Maurice. “Le secret central de

l’initiation aux Mystères d’Eleusis.” In

Initiation, ed. Bleeker, 65–70.

Meier, Gerhard. “Die Ritualtafel der Serie

‘Mundwaschung.’” AfO 12 (1937–39):

40–45.

de Meulenaere, Herman. “Quatre noms propres de basse époque.” BIFAO 55

(1955): 141–48.

———. “Pyramidions d’Abydos.” JEOL

7/20 (1967–68): 1–20.

Migne, J.-P. Dictionnaire des apocryphes. 2

vols. Vols. 23 and 24 of Encyclopédie

théologique, ser. 3. Paris: Migne,

1856–58.

Molin, Georg. Die Söhne des Lichtes.

Vienna: Herold, 1954.

Möller, Georg. Hieratische Lesestücke für

den akademischen Gebrauch. 3 vols.

Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1927–35.

———. Hieratische Paläographie. 3 vols.

Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1909–12.

———. “Zur Datierung literarischer

Handschriften aus der ersten Hälfte des

Neuen Reichs.” ZÄS 56 (1920): 34–43.

Montet, Pierre. “Chonsou et son serviteur.”

Kêmi 12 (1952): 59–76.

———. “Le fruit défendu.” Kêmi 11 (1950): 85–116.

———. Les scènes de la vie privée dans

les tombeaux égyptiens de l’Ancien

Empire. Publications de la faculté des

lettres de l’Université de Strasbourg 24.

Strasbourg: Libraire Istra, 1925.

———. “Trois gouverneurs de Tanis

d’après les inscriptions des statues 687,

689 et 700 du Caire.” Kêmi 7 (1938):

123–59.

Mordell, Phineas. “The Origin of Letters and

Numerals according to the Sefer

Yeṣirah.” JQR, n.s., 2 (1911–12): 557–

83.

Morenz, Siegfried. Ägyptische Religion. Die Religionen der Menschheit 8. Stuttgart:

Kohlhammer, 1960.

———. “Das Problem des Werdens zu

Osiris in der griechisch-römischen Zeit

Ägyptens.” In REHR, 75–91.

———. “Rechts und links im Totengericht.”

ZÄS 82 (1957): 62–71.

———. Review of Die Stellung des Königs

im Alten Reich, by Hans Goedicke. OLZ

56 (1961): 244–47.

———. “Zur Vergöttlichung in Ägypten.”

ZÄS 84 (1959): 132–43.

Moret, Alexandre. Du caractère religieux

de la royauté pharaonique. Annales du

Musée Guimet, bibliothèque d’études

15. Paris: Leroux, 1902.

———. Histoire de l’orient. Part 1 of

Histoire générale: Histoire ancienne.

Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,

1929.

———. “L’influence du décor solaire sur la

pyramide.” In Mélanges Maspero I:

Orient ancien, 623–36. MIFAO 66.2.

Cairo: IFAO, 1935–38.

———. Kings and Gods of Egypt. New

York: Putnam, 1912.

———. “La légende d’Osiris à l’époque thébaine d’après l’hymne à Osiris du

Louvre.” BIFAO 30 (1931): 725–50.

———. Mystères égyptiens. Paris: Colin,

1913.

———. Le rituel du culte divin journalier

en Égypte. Annales du Musée Guimet,

bibliothèque d’études 14. Paris: Leroux,

1902.

———. “Serdab et maison du Ka.” ZÄS 52

(1914): 88–89.

———. “Varia: Sur le rite de

l’embrassement.” Sphinx 11 (1908):

26–30.

Morgenstern, Julian. “Moses with the

Shining Face.” Hebrew Union College

Annual 2 (1925): 1–27.

Mowinckel, Sigmund. Religion und Kultus.

Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht,

1953.

Müller, Dieter. “I Am Isis.” Review of Ich

bin Isis, by Jan Bergman. OLZ 67

(1972): 117–30.

———. “Die Zeugung durch das Herz in

Religion und Medizin der Ägypter.” Or

35 (1966): 247–74.

Munro, Peter. “Bemerkungen zu einem

Sedfest-Relief in der Stadtmauer von

Kairo.” ZÄS 86 (1961): 61–74.

Nagel, George. “Un papyrus funéraire de la

fin du Nouvel Empire (Louvre 3292

[inv.]).” BIFAO 29 (1929): 1–127.

Naville, Edouard H. Das ägyptische

Todtenbuch der XVIII. bis XX.

Dynastie. 3 vols. Berlin: Asher, 1886.

———. “La destruction des hommes par les

dieux: D’après une inscription

mythologique du tombeau de Séti I, à

Thèbes.” Transactions of the Society of

Biblical Archaeology 4 (1875): 1–19.

———. “Le discours d’Horus à Osiris.”

ZÄS 13 (1875): 89–91.

———. “La plante magique de Noferatum.”

Revue de l’Égypte ancienne 1 (1925):

31–44.

Nelson, Nels L. The Mormon Point of View.

Provo, Utah: n.p., 1904.

Nibley, Hugh W. Abraham in Egypt. CWHN

14. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and

FARMS, 2000.

———. The Ancient State: The Rulers and

the Ruled. CWHN 10. Salt Lake City:

Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991.

———. An Approach to the Book of

Mormon. CWHN 6. Salt Lake City:

Deseret Book and FARMS, 1988.

———. “The Arrow, the Hunter, and the

State.” Western Political Quarterly 2

(1949): 328–44. Reprinted in The

Ancient State: The Rulers and the

Ruled. CWHN 10:1–32.

———. “As Things Stand at the Moment.”

BYU Studies 9/1 (1968): 69–102.

———. “The Babylonian Background.” IE, September 1956, 509–11, 514, 516.

Reprinted in Lehi in the Desert; The

World of the Jaredites; There Were

Jaredites. CWHN 5:350–79.

———. “Baptism for the Dead in Ancient

Times.” Parts 1–5. IE, December 1948,

786–88, 836–38; January 1949, 24–26,

60; February 1949, 90–91, 109–10, 112;

March 1949, 146–48, 180–83; April

1949, 212–14. Reprinted in Mormonism

and Early Christianity. CWHN 4:100–

167.

———. “Christian Envy of the Temple.”

JQR, n.s., 50 (1959–60): 97–123, 229–

40. Reprinted in Mormonism and Early

Christianity. CWHN 4:391–434.

———. “The Early Christian Prayer

Circle.” BYU Studies 19/1 (1978): 41–

78. Reprinted in Mormonism and Early

Christianity. CWHN 4:45–99.

———. Enoch the Prophet. CWHN 2. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS,

1986.

———. “Evangelium Quadraginta Dierum.”

Vigiliae christianae 20 (1966): 1–24.

Reprinted as “Evangelium Quadraginta

Dierum: The Forty-day Mission of

Christ—The Forgotten Heritage,” in

Mormonism and Early Christianity.

CWHN 4:10–44.

———. “The Expanding Gospel.” BYU

Studies 7/1 (1965): 3–27. Reprinted in

Temple and Cosmos: Beyond This

Ignorant Present. CWHN 12:177–211.

———. “The Hierocentric State.” Western

Political Quarterly 4 (1951): 226–53.

Reprinted in The Ancient State: The

Rulers and the Ruled. CWHN 10:99–

147.

———. Lehi in the Desert; The World of

the Jaredites; There Were Jaredites.

CWHN 5. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1988.

———. “The Meaning of the Kirtland

Egyptian Papers.” BYU Studies 11/4

(1971): 350–99.

———. Mormonism and Early

Christianity. CWHN 4. Salt Lake City;

Deseret Book and FARMS, 1987.

———. “A New Look at the Pearl of Great

Price.” Parts 1–29. IE, January 1968–

May 1970. Portions reprinted in

Abraham in Egypt. CWHN 14:86–109,

127–56, 163–208, 319–39, 343–76.

———. Old Testament and Related

Studies. CWHN 1. Salt Lake City:

Deseret Book and FARMS, 1986.

———. “Qumran and ‘The Companions of

the Cave.’” Revue de Qumran 5 (1965):

177–98. Reprinted in Old Testament

and Related Studies. CWHN 1:253–84.

———. Since Cumorah: The Book of

Mormon in the Modern World. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1967.

Reprinted as Since Cumorah. CWHN 7.

———. “Sparsiones.” Classical Journal 40

(1945): 515–43. Reprinted in The

Ancient State: The Rulers and the

Ruled. CWHN 10:148–94.

———. “Strange Ships and Shining Stones

(A Not So Fantastic Story).” In A Book

of Mormon Treasury: Selections from

the Pages of the Improvement Era,

133–51. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft,

1959. Reprinted in An Approach to the

Book of Mormon. CWHN 6:340–58.

———. Temple and Cosmos: Beyond This

Ignorant Present. CWHN 12. Salt Lake

City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1992.

———. “Tenting, Toll, and Taxing.” Western

Political Quarterly 19 (1966): 599–

630. Reprinted in The Ancient State:

The Rulers and the Ruled. CWHN

10:33–98.

———. “There Were Jaredites.” Parts 1–14.

IE, January 1956–February 1957.

Reprinted in Lehi in the Desert; The

World of the Jaredites; There Were

Jaredites. CWHN 5:283–443.

———. “Treasures in the Heavens: Some

Early Christian Insights into the

Organizing of Worlds.” Dialogue 8/3–4

(1973): 76–98. Reprinted in Old

Testament and Related Studies. CWHN

1:171–214.

———. “Victoriosa Loquacitas: The Rise of

Rhetoric and the Decline of Everything

Else.” Western Speech 20/2 (1956):

57–82. Reprinted in The Ancient State:

The Rulers and the Ruled, CWHN

10:243–86.

———. “What Is ‘The Book of

Breathings’?” BYU Studies 11/2 (1971):

153–87.

Ninck, Martin H. Die Bedeuting des Wassers im Kult und Leben der Alten:

Eine symbolgeschichtliche

Untersuchung. Darmstadt:

Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft,

1960.

Obermann, Julian. “Wind, Water, and Light

in an Archaic Inscription from

Shechem.” JBL 57 (1938): 239–53.

O’Connor, Frank. “Adventures in

Translation.” The Listener and BBC

Television Review, 25 January 1962,

175, 178.

Oksala, Päivö. “Die göttliche Hochzeit und

der Hain der Götter—Catulls Gedicht

64.” Temenos 4 (1969): 81–91.

Oppenheim, A. Leo. “Mesopotamian

Mythology II.” Or 17 (1948): 17–58.

Otto, Eberhard. Das ägyptische

Mundöffnungsritual. 2 vols. ÄA 3.

Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1960.

———. “Altägyptische Zeitvorstellungen und Zeitbegriffe.” Die Welt als

Geschichte 14 (1954): 135–48.

———. “Das ‘goldene Zeitalter’ in einem

ägyptischen Text.” In REHR, 93–108.

———. Gott und Mensch nach den

ägyptischen Tempelinschriften der

grieschisch-römischen Zeit: Eine

Untersuchungen zur Phraseologie der

Tempelinschriften. Abhandlungen der

Heidelberger Akademie der

Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-

historische Klasse 1964.1. Heidelberg:

Winter, 1964.

———. Review of The Egyptian Coffin

Texts VII: Texts of Spells 787–1185, by

Adriaan de Buck. ZDMG 113 (1963):

196–98.

———. Review of Les inscriptions du

temple d’Opet, à Karnak, vol. 3, by

Constant de Wit. BiOr 28 (1971): 41–

42.

———. “Sprüche auf altägyptischen

Särgen.” ZDMG 102 (1952): 187–200.

———. “Zur Bedeutung der ägyptischen

Tempelstatue seit dem neuen Reich.” Or

17 (1948): 448–66.

Otto, Walter F. Die Musen und der göttliche

Ursprung des Singens und Sagens. 3rd

ed. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche

Buchgesellschaft, 1961.

Pallis, Svend A. The Babylonian Akîtu

Festival. Kongelige Danske

Videnskabernes Selskab, historisk-

filologiske Meddelelser 12.1.

Copenhagen: Høst, 1926.

Palmer, Leonard R. “Mr. Ventris and His

Critics.” OLZ 53 (1958): 101–17.

Parker, Richard A. “The Joseph Smith

Egyptian Papyri: Translations and

Interpretations: The Book of Breathings

(Fragment 1, the ‘Sensen’ Text, with

Restorations from Louvre Papyrus 3284).” Dialogue 3/2 (1968): 98–99.

Parrott, Douglas M. Nag Hammadi Codices

V, 2–5 and VI with Papyrus

Berolinensis 8502, 1 and 4. Nag

Hammadi Studies 11. Leiden: Brill,

1979.

von Pauly, August F., and Georg Wissowa.

Paulys Realencyclopädie der

classischen Altertumswissenschaft. 1st

and 2nd ser. Stuttgart: Metzler, 1893–

1978.

Peet, T. Eric. “A Historical Document of

Ramesside Age.” JEA 10 (1924): 116–

27.

———. The Present Position of

Egyptological Studies. Oxford:

Clarendon, 1934.

———. Review of The Origin of Magic

and Religion, by William J. Perry. JEA 10 (1924): 63–69.

Pelletier, André. “Le grand rideau du vestibule du temple de Jérusalem.”

Syria 35 (1958): 218–26.

Perry, William J. “The Cult of the Sun and

the Cult of the Dead in Egypt.” JEA 11

(1925): 191–200.

Petrie, W. M. Flinders. “Osiris in the Tree

and Pillar. ” Ancient Egypt (1928): 40–

44.

———. Six Temples at Thebes, 1896.

London: Quaritch, 1897.

Philonenko, Marc. “La cosmogonie du

‘Livre des secrets d’Hénoch.’” In

REHR, 109–16.

———. Les interpolations chrétiennes des

testaments des douze patriarches et les

manuscripts de Qumrân. Paris: Presses

universitaires de France, 1960.

Piankoff, Alexandre. Le “coeur” dans les

textes égyptiens depuis l’Ancien

jusqu’à la fin du Nouvel Empire. Paris:

Geuthner, 1930.

———. “Les deux papyrus ‘mythologiques’

de Her-Ouben au Musée du Caire.”

ASAE 49 (1949): 129–44.

———. “Le Livre des Quererts.” BIFAO 41

(1942): 1–11 and pls. 1–9; 42 (1944):

1–62 and pls. 10–79; 43 (1945): 1–50

and pls. 80–151.

———. “Le Livre du Jour dans la tombe

(no. 132) de Ramose.” ASAE 41 (1942):

151–58.

———. Le Livre du Jour et de la Nuit.

Bibliothèque d’étude 13. Cairo: IFAO,

1942.

———. Mythological Papyri. 2 vols.

Bollingen Series 40.3. New York:

Pantheon, 1957.

———. The Pyramid of Unas. Bollingen

Series 40.5. Princeton: Princeton

University Press, 1968.

———. The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon. Ed.

N. Rambova. Bollingen Series 40.2.

New York: Pantheon, 1955.

———. “The Sky-Goddess Nut and the

Night Journey of the Sun.” JEA 20

(1934): 57–61.

Pieper, Max. Die grosse Inschrift des

Königs Neferhotep in Abydos: Ein

Beitrag zur ägyptischen Religions- und

Literaturgeschichte. Mitteilungen der

vorderasiatisch-ägyptischen

Gesellschaft (e.v.) 32.2. Leipzig:

Hinrichs, 1929.

Pirenne, Jacques. “Âme et vie d’outre-tombe

chez les égyptiens de l’Ancien Empire.”

CdE 34 (1959): 208–13.

Polotsky, Hans J., ed. Kephalaia: 1. Hälfte

(Lieferung 1–10). Stuttgart:

Kohlhammer, 1940.

Posener, Georges. “Les criminels débaptisés

et les mort sans noms.” RdE 5 (1946):

51–56.

———. De la divinité du pharaon. Cahiers de la Société Asiatique 15. Paris:

Imprimerie Nationale, 1960.

———. “Philologie et archéologie

égyptiennes.” Annuaire du Collège de

France 62 (1962): 287–95.

———. “Une réinterprétation tardive du

nom du dieu Khonsou.” ZÄS 93 (1966):

115–19.

Preisigke, Friedrich. Vom göttlichen

Fluidum nach ägyptischer Anschauung.

Papyrusinstitut Heidelberg 1. Berlin: de

Gruyter, 1920.

Printz, Wilhelm. “Gilgamesch und

Alexander.” ZDMG 85 (1931): 196–

206.

Puech, H.-Ch., and G. Quispel. “Les écrits

gnostiques du codex Jung.” Vigiliae

christianae 8 (1954): 1–51.

Quaegebeur, Jan. “Le Papyrus Denon à La

Haye et une famille de prophètes de

Min-Amon.” In Aspekte

spätägyptischer Kultur, ed. Martina

Minas and Jürgen Zeidler, 213–23.

Mainz am Rhein: Verlag Philipp von

Zabern, 1994.

Ranke, Hermann. Die ägyptischen

Personennamen. 2 vols. Glückstadt:

Augustin, 1935–52.

———. “Ein spätsaïtische Statue in

Philadelphia.” MDAIK 12 (1943): 107–

38.

Ratié, Suzanne. Review of Catalogue of

Egyptian Antiquities in the British

Museum I: Mummies and Human

Remains, by Warren R. Dawson and P.

H. K. Gray. BiOr 26 (1969): 189–92.

Recueil d’études égyptologiques: Dédiées à

la mémoire de Jean-François

Champollion. Paris: Champion, 1922.

Reich, Nathaniel J. “An Abbreviated

Demotic Book of the Dead: A

Palaeographical Study of Papyrus

British Museum 10072.” JEA 17

(1931): 85–97.

Renfrew, Colin. “Carbon 14 and the

Prehistory of Europe.” Scientific

American, October 1971, 63–72.

Renouf, Peter Le Page. Lectures on the

Origin and Growth of Religion as

Illustrated by the Religion of Ancient

Egypt. Hibbert Lectures, 1879. London:

Williams and Norgate, 1880.

———. Nuk pu nuk’: Use of Obelisks as

Lightning Conductors.” In The Life-

Work of Sir Peter Le Page Renouf, ed.

Edouard Naville and W. Harry Rylands,

2:161–62. Paris: Leroux, 1902–5.

———. “On the True Sense of an Important

Egyptian Word (

Ka).” In The Life-

Work of Sir Peter Le Page Renouf, ed.

Edouard Naville and W. Harry Rylands,

2:229–45. Paris: Leroux, 1902–5.

Revillout, Eugène. “Amasis sur le lac et le conte du nautonnier.” Revue

égyptologique 12 (1907): 113–20.

———. Rituel funéraire de Pamonth en

démotique. 2 vols. Paris: Leroux. 1880–

88.

Reymond, E. A. E. The Mythical Origin of

the Egyptian Temple. Manchester:

Manchester University Press, 1969.

———. Review of Le temple d’Esna: Esna

III, by Serge Sauneron. BiOr 28 (1971): 318–20.

———. “The Shebtiw in the Temple at

Edfu.” ZÄS 87 (1962): 41–54.

———. “Worship of the Ancestor Gods at

Edfu.” CdE 38 (1963): 49–70.

Reynolds, George. The Myth of the

Manuscript Found. Salt Lake City:

Juvenile Instructor, 1883.

Rhodes, Michael D. The Hor Book of

Breathings: A Translation and

Commentary. Provo, Utah: FARMS, 2002.

Riddle, Donald W. “The Cephas-Peter

Problem, and a Possible Solution.” JBL

59 (1940): 169–80.

Ringgren, Helmer. “Light and Darkness in

Ancient Egyptian Religion.” In Liber

Amicorum: Studies in Honour of

Professor Dr. C. J. Bleeker, 140–50.

Studies in the History of Religion

(Supplements to Numen) 17. Leiden:

Brill, 1969.

Roberts, Brigham H. Comprehensive

History of the Church of Jesus Christ

of Latter-day Saints: Century 1. 6 vols.

Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press,

1930.

Robinson, James M. The Nag Hammadi

Library in English. San Francisco:

Harper and Row, 1977.

de Rochas, Albert. “Les bénitiers à tirelire

et à tourniquet dans les temples de l’ancienne Égypte.” ASAE 12 (1912):

95–96.

Rochemonteix, Maxence de. “Le temple

d’Apet, où est engendré l’Osiris de

Thèbes.” RT 3 (1881): 72–86; 6 (1885):

21–35. Enlarged and reprinted as “Le

temple d’Apet où est engendré l’Osiris

thébain.” In Oeuvres diverses, ed.

Gaston Maspero, 169–318. BE 3. Paris:

Leroux, 1894.

Roeder, Günther. “Das Ichneumon in der

ägyptischen Religion und Kunst.”

Egyptian Religion 4 (1936): 1–48.

———. Urkunden zur Religion des alten

Ägypten. Jena: Diederichs, 1915.

de Rougé, Emmanuel. “Étude sur une stèle

égyptienne appartenant à la

Bibliothèque Impériale.” In Oeuvres

diverses, ed. Gaston Maspero, 3:139–

319. BE 23. Paris: Leroux, 1910.

Rupp, Alfred. “Geschichte und

Seinszusammenhang.” BiOr 26 (1969):

19–26.

Rusch, Adolf. Die Entwicklung der

Himmelsgöttin Nut zu einer

Totengottheit. Mitteilungen der

vorderasiatisch-ägyptischen

Gesellschaft 27.1. Leipzig: Hinrichs,

1922.

———. “Ein Osirisritual in den

Pyramidentexten.” ZÄS 60 (1925): 16–

39.

Sander-Hansen, Constantin E. Ägyptische

Grammatik. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,

1963.

———. Das Gottesweib des Amun. Det

kongelige danske videnskabernes

Selskab, historisk-filologiske Skrifter

1.1. Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1940.

———. Die religiösen Texte auf dem Sarg

der Anchnesneferibre. Copenhagen:

Levin and Munksgaard, 1937.

———. Die Texte der Metternichstele.

Analecta Aegyptiaca 7. Copenhagen:

Munksgaard, 1956.

Santillana, Giorgio de. The Origins of

Scientific Thought. Chicago: University

of Chicago Press, 1961.

Santillana, Giorgio de, and Hertha von

Dechend. Hamlet’s Mill: An Essay on

Myth and the Frame of Time. Boston:

Gambit, 1969.

Sasson, Jack M. “Circumcision in the

Ancient Near East.” JBL 85 (1966):

473–76.

Sauneron, Serge. “L’hymne au soleil levant

des Papyrus de Berlin 3050, 3056 et

3048.” BIFAO 53 (1953): 65–90.

Schack-Schackenburg, Hans. Das Buch von

den Zwei Wegen des seligen Toten

(Zweiwegebuch): Texte aus der

Pyramidenzeit nach einem im Berliner

Museum bewahrten Sargboden des Mittleren Reiches. Leipzig: Hinrichs,

1903.

Schäfer, Heinrich. “Altägyptische Bilder der

auf- und untergehenden Sonne.” ZÄS 71

(1935): 15–38.

———. “Die Ausdeutung der Spiegelplatte

als Sonnenscheibe.” ZÄS 68 (1932): 1–

7.

———. “Djed-Pfeiler, Lebenszeichen,

Osiris, Isis.” In Studies for F Ll.

Griffith, ed. Glanville, 424–31.

———. “Das sogenannte ‘Blut der Isis’ und

das Zeichen ‘Leben.’” ZÄS 62 (1927):

108–10.

Scharbert, Josef. Review of Ephod und

Choschen im Lichte des alten Orients,

by Ingolf Friedrich. AfO 23 (1970):

117–18.

Scharff, Alexander, and Anton Moortgat.

Ägypten und Vorderasien im Altertum.

Munich: Bruckmann, 1950.

Schering, Ernst. “Adam und die Schlange.”

Zeitschrift für Religions- und

Geistesgeschichte 10 (1958): 97–124.

Schmidt, Carl. The Books of Jeu and the

Untitled Text in the Bruce Codex.

Trans. Violet MacDermot. Coptic

Gnostic Library: Nag Hammadi Studies

13. Leiden: Brill, 1978.

———. Kephalaia (Berlin Manichaean

Manuscript). 2 vols. Stuttgart:

Kohlhammer, 1935.

———, ed. Gnostische Schriften in

koptischer Sprache aus dem Codex

Brucianus. Texte und Untersuchungen

zur Geschichte der altchristlichen

Literatur 8. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1892.

———, ed. Pistis Sophia. Coptica 2.

Hauniae: Gyldendalske Boghandel-

Nordisk, 1925. English translation in

Pistis Sophia. Trans. Violet

MacDermot. Nag Hammadi Studies 9.

Leiden: Brill, 1978.

Schoneveld, J. “Urim en Tummim.” In

Orientalia Neerlandica: A Volume of

Oriental Studies, 216–22. Leiden:

Sijthoff’s Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V.,

1948.

Schott, Erika. “Die heilige Vase des Amon.”

ZÄS 98 (1970): 34–50.

Schott, Siegfried. Die Deutung der

Geheimnisse des Rituals für die

Abwehr des Bösen: Eine altägyptische

Übersetzung. Abhandlungen der

geistes- und sozialwissenschaftlichen

Klasse, 1954, 4:143–237. Wiesbaden:

Akademie der Wissenschaften und der

Literatur in Mainz, 1954.

———. Mythe und Mythenbildung im alten

Ägypten. UGAÄ 15. Leipzig: Hinrichs,

1945.

———. “Nut spricht als Mutter und Sarg.”

RdE 17 (1965): 81–87.

———. Die Reinigung Pharaos in einem

memphitischen Tempel (Berlin P

13242), 45–92. Nachrichten der

Akademie der Wissenschaften in

Göttingen, Philologisch-historische

Klasse 1957.3. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck

und Ruprecht, 1957.

———. Das schöne Fest vom Wüstentale:

Festbräuche einer Totenstadt. In

Abhandlungen der geistes- und

sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse,

1952.11, 765–902. Wiesbaden:

Akademie der Wissenschaften und der

Literatur in Mainz, 1952.

———. Die Schrift der verborgenen

Kammer in Königsgräbern der 18.

Dynastie, 315–72 . Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in

Göttingen, Philologisch-historische

Klasse 1958.4. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck

und Ruprecht, 1958.

———. “Thoth als Verfasser heiliger

Schriften.” ZÄS 99 (1972): 20–25.

———. Urkunden mythologischen Inhalts.

Urkunden des ägyptischen Altertums

6.1. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929.

———. Zum Weltbild der Jenseitsführer

des neuen Reiches, 185–97.

Nachrichten der Akademie der

Wissenschaften in Göttingen,

Philologish-historische Klasse 1965.11.

Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht,

1965.

Schuchhardt, Karl. Alteuropa: Kulturen,

Rassen, Völker. 3rd ed. Berlin: de

Gruyter, 1935.

Schützinger, Heinrich. Ursprung und

Entwicklung der arabischen Abraham-

Nimrod-Legende. Bonner

Orientalistische Studien, neue Serie 11.

Bonn: Selbstverlag des Orientalischen

Seminars der Universität Bonn, 1961.

Schwartz, Benjamin. “A Hittite Ritual Text

(KUB 29.1 = 1780/c).” Or 16 (1947):

23–55.

Schweitzer, Ursula. Löwe und Sphinx im

alten Ägypten. Ägyptologische

Forschungen 15. Glückstadt: Augustin,

1948.

Sethe, Kurt. Die altägyptische

Pyramidentexte. 4 vols. Leipzig:

Hinrichs, 1908–22.

———. “Beiträge zur Geschichte

Amenophis’ IV.” In Nachrichten der

Königlichen Gesellschaft der

Wissenschaften zu Göttingen,

Philologisch-historische Klasse 1921,

101–30. Berlin: Weidmanns, 1921.

———. “Der Denkstein mit dem Datum des

Jahres 400 der Ära von Tanis.” ZÄS 65

(1930): 85–89.

———. Dramatische Texte zur

altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Das

“Denkmal memphitischer Theologie”

der Schabakostein des Britischen

Museums. UGAÄ 10.1. Leipzig:

Hinrichs, 1928. Reprint, Hildesheim:

Olms, 1964.

———. Dramatische Texte zur

altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Der

dramatische Ramesseumpapyrus: Ein

Spiel zur Thronbesteigung des Königs.

UGAÄ 10.2. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928.

———. “Der Lautwert von .” ZÄS 39

(1901): 135–37.

———. “Menes und die Gründung von

Memphis.” In Beiträge zur ältesten

Geschichte Ägyptens, 121–41. UGAÄ

3. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1905.

———. “Osiris und die Zeder von Byblos.”

ZÄS 47 (1910): 71–73.

———. Die Sprüche für das Kennen der

Seelen der heiligen Orte (Kap. 107–

109, 111–116 des ägyptischen Totenbuchs): Göttinger

Totenbuchstudien von 1919. ZÄS

Special Publication 57–59. Leipzig:

Hinrichs, 1925.

———. “Die Sprüche für das Kennen der

Seelen der heiligen Orte.” ZÄS 57

(1922): 1–50; 58 (1923): 1–24, 57–78;

59 (1924): 1–20, 73–99.

———. “Die Türteile bnš und ʿ rj.t. ” ZÄS

67 (1931): 115–17.

———. Übersetzung und Kommentar zu

den altägyptischen Pyramidentexten. 6

vols. 1935–39 (first 4 vols.). Reprint

(with 2 additional vols.), Hamburg:

Augustin, 1962.

———. Urgeschichte und älteste Religion

der Ägypter. 1930. Reprint, Nendeln,

Liechtenstein: Krauss, 1966.

———. Urkunden der 18. Dynastie.

Urkunden des ägyptischen Altertums 4.

Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1906.

———. Zur altägyptischen Sage vom

Sonnenauge das in der Fremde war.

UGAÄ 5. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1912.

———. “Zur ältesten Geschichte des

ägyptischen Seeverkehrs mit Byblos und

dem Libanongebiet.” ZÄS 45 (1908): 7–

14.

Sethe, Kurt, and Heinrich Schäfer, eds.

Urkunden mythologischen Inhalts.

Urkunden des ägyptischen Altertums

6.5. Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929.

Shorter, Alan W. “Reliefs Showing the

Coronation of Ramesses II.” JEA 20

(1934): 18–19.

Siebourg, Max. “Neue Goldblättchen mit

griechischen Aufschriften.” Archiv für

Religionswissenschaft 10 (1907): 393–

99.

Simon, Marcel. “Souillure morale et

souillure rituelle dans le christianisme

primitif.” Studi e materiali di storia delle religioni 38 (1967): 498–511.

Sloley, R. W. “Primitive Methods of

Measuring Time, with Special

Reference to Egypt.” JEA 17 (1931):

166–78.

Smith, G. Elliot. The Evolution of the

Dragon. Manchester: Manchester

University Press, 1919.

Smith, Jonathan Z. “The Garments of

Shame.” History of Religions 5 (1965–

66): 217–38.

Smith, Joseph. History of The Church of

Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 2nd

ed. rev. 7 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret

Book, 1978.

———. Lectures on Faith. Salt Lake City:

Deseret Book, 1985.

———. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph

Smith. Comp. Joseph Fielding Smith.

Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938.

Smith, Morton. The Secret Gospel: The Discovery and Interpretation of the

Secret Gospel According to Mark. New

York: Harper and Row, 1973.

Smolian, J. “Vehicula religiosa: Wagen in

mythos, ritus, kultus und mysterium.”

Numen 10 (1963): 202–27.

Sottas, Henri. “Contribution à l’étude de la

notion du Ka égyptien.” Sphinx 17

(1913): 33–42.

Spalding, Franklin S. Joseph Smith, Jr., as a

Translator: An Inquiry. Salt Lake City:

Arrow, 1912.

Speleers, Louis. “La résurrection et la

toilette du mort selon les Textes des

Pyramides.” RdE 3 (1938): 36–67.

———. “La signification des pyramides.” In

Mélanges Maspero I: Orient ancien,

603–21. MIFAO 66.2. Cairo: IFAO,

1935–38.

———. Textes des Cercueils du Moyen

Empire égyptien. Brussels: n.p., 1946.

———. Les Textes des Pyramides

égyptiennes. 2 vols. Brussels:

Vanderpoorten, 1923–24.

Sperling, Harry, and Maurice Simon. The

Zohar. 2nd ed. 5 vols. London: Soncino,

1984.

Spiegel, Joachim. “Das Auferstehungsritual

der Unaspyramide.” ASAE 53 (1956):

339–439.

———. Das Auferstehungsritual der Unas-

Pyramide. ÄA 23. Wiesbaden:

Harrassowitz, 1971.

Spiegelberg, Wilhelm. Der ägyptische

Mythus vom Sonnenauge (der Papyrus

der Tierfabeln—“Kufi”) nach dem

leidener demotischen Papyrus I 384.

Strassburg: Schultz, 1917.

———. Der ägyptische Mythus vom

Sonnenauge in einem demotischen

Papyrus der römischen Kaiserzeit,

876–94. Sitzungsberichte der königlich

preussischen Akademie der

Wissenschaften 51. Berlin: Preussischen

Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1915.

———. “Der ägyptische Name von

Pelusium.” ZÄS 49 (1911): 81–84.

———. “Ein Bruchstück des

Bestattungsrituals der Apisstiere.” ZÄS

56 (1920): 1–33.

———. “Das Herz als zweites Wesen des

Menschen.” ZÄS 66 (1931): 35–37.

———. “Die vermeintliche Erwähnung des

Blitzableiters in ägyptischen

Inschriften.” ZÄS 45 (1908): 34–35.

———. “Zu Rȝ-śṯȝ.w, ‘Nekropolis.’”

ZÄS 59 (1924): 159–60.

Spiegelberg, Wilhelm, and Kurt Sethe. “Das

Grundwort zum Lautzeichen ḏ. ” ZÄS

55 (1918): 89–92.

Steindorff, Georg. “Der Ka und die

Grabstatuen.” ZÄS 48 (1910): 152–59.

———. “Ein koptischer Grabstein.” ZÄS 38

(1900): 57–61.

Steuer, Robert O. Über das wohlriechende

Natron bei den alten Ägyptern:

Interpretation, Darstellung und Kultur

des ṣnṯr. Leiden: Brill, 1937.

Stevens (Drower), Ethel S. See Drower,

Ethel S. Stevens.

Stewart, Harry M. “A Crossword Hymn to

Mut.” JEA 57 (1971): 87–104.

Stolk, Martinus. Ptah: Ein Beitrag zur

Religionsgeschichte des alten

Ägyptens. Berlin: Paul, 1911.

Stricker, Bruno H. “De Egyptische

mysteriën: Pap. Leiden T 32.” OMRO

31 (1950): 45–63; 34 (1953): 13–31; 37

(1956): 49–67.

———. De Geboorte van Horus. 2 vols.

Leiden: Brill, l963–68.

———. “De Lijkspapyrus van Sensaos.”

OMRO 23 (1942): 30–47.

Suhr, Elmer G. “The Sphinx.” Folklore 81

(1970): 97–111.

Suys, Émile. “Les messagers des dieux.”

Egyptian Religion 2 (1934): 123–39.

Szczułowska, Albertyna. “Liturgical Text

Preserved on Sȩkowski Papyrus.” ZÄS

98 (1970): 50–80.

———. “Pyramid Texts Preserved on

Sȩkowski Papyrus.” ZÄS 99 (1972):

25–29.

Thausing, Gertrud. “Der ägyptische

Schicksalsbegriff.” MDAIK 8 (1939):

44–70.

———. Der Auferstehungsgedanke in

ägyptischen religiösen Texten.

Sammlung orientalistischer Arbeiten 16.

Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 1943.

———. “Das ‘Aufhacken der Erde.’”

Archiv für ägyptische Archäologie 1

(1938): 7–17.

———. “Die Ausdrücke für ‘Ewig’ im

Ägyptischen.” In Mélanges Maspero I: Orient ancien, ed. Pierre Jouguet, 35–

42. MIFAO 66.1. Cairo: IFAO, 1935–

38.

———. Sein und Werden: Versuch einer

Ganzheitsschau der Religion des

Pharaonenreiches. Acta Ethnologica et

Linguistica 23, Series Africana 6.

Vienna: Stiglmayr, 1971.

Thausing, Gertrud, and Traudl Kerszt-

Kratschmann. Das grosse ägyptische

Totenbuch (Papyrus Reinisch) der

Papyrussammlung der

Österreichischen Nationalbibliothek.

Schriften des Österreichischen

Kulturinstituts Kairo, archäologisch-

historische Abteilung 1. Cairo:

Österreichisches Kulturinstitut, 1969.

Thomas, Elizabeth. “Solar Barks Prow to

Prow.” JEA 42 (1956): 65–79.

———. “Terrestrial Marsh and Solar Mat.”

JEA 45 (1959): 38–51.

Thomas, N. W. “What Is the Ka?” JEA 6

(1920): 265–73.

Thompson, Stith. Motif-Index of Folk-

Literature: A Classification of

Narrative Elements. 6 vols. Rev. and

enl. ed. Bloomington: Indiana University

Press, 1966.

Till, Walter. Das Evangelium nach

Philippos. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1963.

Todd, Jay M. “Background of the Church

Historian’s Fragment.” IE, February

1968, 40a–40h.

Tompkins, Peter. Secrets of the Great

Pyramid. New York: Harper and Row,

1971.

Tondriau, Julien. “Tatouage, lierre et

syncrétismes.” Aegyptus 30 (1950): 57–

66.

Trumpf, Jürgen. “Stadtgründung und

Drachenkampf.” Hermes 86 (1958):

129–57.

Tullidge, Edward W. Life of Joseph the

Prophet. Plano, Ill.: Reorganized LDS

Church, 1880.

Turner, Wallace. “Mormon’s Book of

Abraham Called Product of

Imagination.” New York Times, 3 May

1970, 43.

University of Chicago Oriental Institute

Epigraphic Survey. Festival Scenes of

Ramses III. Medinet Habu 4. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1940.

———. The Temple Proper. Medinet Habu

5. Chicago: University of Chicago

Press, 1957.

Vaillant, A. Le Livre des Secrets D’Hénoch.

Paris: Institut d’Études Slaves, 1952.

Van Andel, Cent Pieter. De Structuur van de

Henoch-Traditie in het Nieuwe

Testament. Studia theologica Rheno-

Traiectina 2. Utrecht: Kemink, 1955.

Van Buren, E. Douglas. “The Esoteric Significance of Kassite Glyptic Art.” Or

23 (1954): 1–39.

Vandier, Jacques. “Iousâas et (Hathor)-

Nébet-Hétépet.” RdE 16 (1964): 55–

146; 17 (1965): 89–176.

te Velde, Herman. “The God Heka in

Egyptian Theology.” JEOL 7/21 (1969–

70): 175–86.

———. “Some Remarks on the Structure of

Egyptian Divine Triads.” JEA 57

(1971): 80–86.

Verner, Miroslav. “Statue of Twēret (Cairo

Museum no. 39145) Dedicated by

Pabēsi and Several Remarks on the

Role of the Hippopotamus Goddess.”

ZÄS 96 (1969): 52–63.

Vycichl, Werner. “Der Feuerstrom im

Jenseits.” Archiv für ägyptische

Archäologie 1 (1938): 263–64.

Wainwright, Gerald A. “Letopolis.” JEA 18

(1932): 159–72.

———. The Sky Religion of Egypt: Its

Antiquity and Effects. London:

Cambridge University Press, 1938.

———. “Some Aspects of Amūn.” JEA 20

(1934):139–53.

Watson, Lyall. Supernature. Garden City,

N.Y.: Anchor, 1963.

Weigall, Arthur E. P. “Miscellaneous

Notes.” ASAE 11 (1911): 170–76.

Weil, Gustav. Biblische Legenden der

Muselmänner: Aus arabischen Quellen

zusammengetragen und mit jüdischen

Sagen verglichen. Frankfurt am Main:

Literarische Anstalt, 1845. English

translation in The Bible, the Koran, and

the Talmud; or, Biblical Legends of the

Mussulmans. New York: Harper, 1846.

Weill, Raymond. “L’incantation anti-

Osirienne insérée dans la composition

du chapitre Pyramides 1264–1279.”

BIFAO 46 (1947): 159–97.

Weiss, Hans-Friedrich. Untersuchungen zur

Kosmologie des hellenistischen und

palästinischen Judentums. Texte und

Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der

altchristlichen Literatur 97. Berlin:

Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften,

1966.

Wellhausen, Julius. Reste arabischen

Heidentums: Gesammelt und Erläutert.

Berlin: de Gruyter, 1961.

Wessetzky, Vilmos. Review of

Untersuchungen zu den ägyptischen

Tempelreliefs der griechisch-

römischen Zeit, by Erich Winter. OLZ

66 (1971): 458–59.

Westendorf, Wolfhart. “Maat, die Führerin

des Sonnenlichtes, in der Architektur.”

ZÄS 97 (1971): 143–46.

Weynants-Ronday, Marie C. “Paradis

égyptiens.” CdE 3 (1927): 52–77.

Whitmer, David. “Address to All Believers in Christ.” N.p., 1887.

Widengren, Geo. The Ascension of the

Apostle and the Heavenly Book.

Uppsala Universitets Årsskrift 1950.7.

Uppsala: Lundequistska, 1950.

———. The Gnostic Attitude. Trans. Birger

A. Pearson. Santa Barbara: Institute of

Religious Studies, 1973.

———. “Early Hebrew Myths and Their

Interpretation.” In Myth, Ritual, and

Kingship, ed. Hooke, 149–203.

Wiedemann, Alfred. Das alte Ägypten.

Heidelberg: Winter, 1920.

———. “Maā[t], déesse de la vérité, et son

rôle dans le panthéon égyptien.”

Annales du Musée Guimet 10 (1887):

561–73.

Wilcken, Ulrich. “Die Bedeutung der

ägyptischen Pflanzensäulen.” ZÄS 39

(1901): 66–70.

Wilkinson, J. Gardner. The Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians. Rev.

ed. 3 vols. New York: Scribner and

Welford, 1879.

Wilmart, André, and Eugène Tisserant.

“Fragments grecs et latins de l’Évangile

de Barthélemy.” Revue biblique, n.s., 10

(1913): 161–90, 321–68.

Wilson, John A. The Culture of Ancient

Egypt. Chicago: University of Chicago

Press, 1956.

———. “The Joseph Smith Egyptian Papyri:

Translations and Interpretations: A

Summary Report.” Dialogue 3/2

(1968): 67–85.

———. Signs and Wonders upon Pharaoh:

A History of American Egyptology.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1964.

Wilson, Robert McLachlan. The Gospel of

Philip. New York: Harper and Row,

1962.

Winston, David. “The Iranian Component in

the Bible, Apocrypha, and Qumran: A

Review of the Evidence.” History of

Religions 5 (1965–66): 183–216.

Winter, Erich. “Eine ägyptische Bronze aus

Ephesos.” ZÄS 97 (1971): 146–55.

Wissowa, Georg. Religion und Kultus der

Römer. 2nd ed. 1912. Reprint, Munich:

Beck, 1971.

de Wit, Constant. “La circoncision chez les

anciens égyptiens.” ZÄS 99 (1972): 41–

48.

———. “Inscriptions dédicatoires du

temple d’Edfou.” CdE 36 (1961): 56–

97, 277–320.

Witzel, Maurus. Auswahl sumerischer

Dichtungen I. Analecta Orientalia 15.

Rome: Pontificium Institutum Biblicum,

1938.

———. “Ninchursag und Enki (Ein Dilmun-

Mythus).” Or 15 (1946): 239–85.

Wolf-Brinkmann, Elske M. Review of A

Study of the Ba Concept in Ancient

Egyptian Texts by Louis V. Žabkar. OLZ

66 (1971): 132–35.

Wood, W. Carleton. “The Religion of Canaan

from the Earliest Times to the Hebrew

Conquest.” JBL 35 (1916): 1–279.

Wreszinski, Walter. Atlas zur altägyptischen

Kulturgeschichte. 3 vols. Leipzig:

Hinrichs, 1923–36.

———. “Das Buch vom Durchwandeln der

Ewigkeit nach einer Stele im Vatikan.”

ZÄS 45 (1908): 111–22.

Wright, George R. H. “Joseph’s Grave under

the Tree by the Omphalos at Shechem.”

Vetus Testamentum 22 (1972): 476–86.

Yadin, Yigael. Megillat-Hammiqdos. 3 vols.

and suppl. Jerusalem: Israel Exploration

Society, 1977.

———. The Scroll of the War of the Sons of

Light against the Sons of Darkness.

Trans. Batya Rabin and Chaim Rabin.

Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1962.

———. The Temple Scroll. 3 vols. and

suppl. Jerusalem: Israel Exploration

Society, 1983.

Young, Brigham. General Conference

Sermon in G. S. L. City. Millennial Star

15 (1853): 486–91.

Yoyotte, Jean. “Le dénommé Mosou.” BIFAO

57 (1958): 81–89.

Žabkar, Louis V. “Some Observations on T.

G. Allen’s Edition of the Book of the

Dead.” JNES 24 (1965): 75–87.

Zandee, Jan. “The Book of Gates.” In Liber

Amicorum: Studies in Honour of

Professor Dr. C. J. Bleeker, 282–324.

Studies in the History of Religion

(Supplements to Numen) 17. Leiden:

Brill, 1969.

———. Death as an Enemy: According to

Ancient Egyptian Conceptions. Trans.

Mrs. W. F. Klasens. Studies in the

History of Religion (Supplements to

Numen) 5. Leiden: Brill, 1960.

———. “Hoofdstuk 85 van het

Doodenboek.” JEOL 2/8 (1942): 580–

86.

———. Review of Les dieux de l’Égypte,

by François Daumas. BiOr 24 (1967):

40–41.

———. Review of Ägyptische Religion, by

Siegfried Morenz. BiOr 19 (1962): 35–

40.

———. “Le roi-dieu et le dieu-roi dans

l’Égypte ancienne.” Numen 3 (1956):

230–34.

———. “Sargtexte, Spruch 75.” ZÄS 97

(1971): 155–62; 99 (1972): 48–63.

Zielinski, Th. “Hermes und die Hermetik.”

Archiv für Religionswissenschaft 8

(1905): 321–72.

Document Outline

Illustrations

Key to Abbreviations

Introduction to the Second Edition

Explanation

Chapter 1. What Manner of Document? What the Book of Breathings Is Not Not the Source of the Book of Abraham

Not an Ordinary Funeral Text

Not Primarily a Funeral Text

Not a Mere Talisman against Foul Odors

The Unique Importance of the Book of Breathings Its Timing

Its Packaging

Jewish and Christian Ties

Classification of Breathings Texts Stricker’s Classification

Ties with Abraham?

An Egyptian “Endowment” ?

Chapter 2. Reproduction and Translation of Joseph Smith Papyri XI and X Column 1, Lines 1–2

Column 1, Lines 3–4

Column 1, Lines 5–7

Column 1, Lines 8–9

Column 2, Lines 1–4

Column 2, Lines 5–8

Column 2, Lines 9–12

Column 3, Lines 1–3

Column 3, Lines 4–7

Column 3, Lines 8–11

Column 3, Lines 12–13

Column 4, Lines 1–5

Column 4, Lines 6–9

Column 4, Lines 10–13

Chapter 3. Translated Correctly? What Is a Translation?

How Did Joseph Smith Translate? What He Meant by a Translation

Are Gadgets Necessary? The Place of Intuition

Method versus Results

Chapter 4. A More Complete Text of the Book of Breathings Text and Translation of Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 with Variants from Joseph Smith Papyri XI and X Nature and Purpose of the Book

Purification Rites and Entering the Temple

The Creation (Resurrection) of Man

The Garden Story

The Long Road Back

Triumph (Coronation)

The Fearful Passage

Vindication and Triumph

Culmination and Conclusion

Some Controls

Papyrus Louvre N. 3279 Column 1

Column 2

Column 3

Column 4

Conclusion of Papyrus Louvre N. 3279

The Petosiris Inscriptions The Portal

The Façade of the Foretemple

The Pronaos, or Foretemple

The South Partition

The Herweben Papyri

Commentary Part 1. The Nature and Purpose of the Book of Breathings Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 1–7

Commentary: “Book” or “Letter”? An Intimate Document

Significance of “Breathings”

Breathing “Permit”? Passport, Identification, Guidebook, Certificate

The Importance of Knowing

Who Is the Real Author? Isis, Thoth, the Scribe

Osiris, the First Initiate

Purpose of the Book: A Rebirth and a Renewing The Sun on the Horizon as the Soul in Transition

Joining the Father Re—Union with the Solar Disk

The ba in Glory

Degrees of Glory

Rebirth by the Heavenly Mother

The Title “God’s Father”

Importance and Secrecy of the Book

The Book of Breathings Is Beneficial to Both Living and Dead

Color Plates

Commentary Part 2. Initiation Rites and Entering the Temple Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 8–14

Commentary

The Osiris Title: The Candidate as an Osiris

Mʿ-ḫrw, Justified

Purification: The Preface to All Important Rites Waters of Passage; the Sun Rising from the Waters

Waters of Life

Waters of Cleansing

Washing and Clothing

Use of Natron and Incense

Anointing

Moral Cleanliness

Pool and Meadow

Way of Passing through the Waters

Meadows of Rest

Meadows of Grasshoppers

The Ladies Edjo (Wḏy.t) and Nekhbet

The Opening of the Mouth Rite: Its Purpose and Origin The Opening of the Mouth Rite as an Anointing

The Oil of Healing: Reversing the Blows of Death

Jewish and Christian Parallels

The Number of Blows (7 and 70)

The Members Affected

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 14–20

Commentary

Purification in the Annex

Entering the Great Hall

Significance of the Two Maats

Recurrent Washings: Declared Clean

Stone of Truth Hebrew and Christian Parallels

Stone of Truth as a Foundation Stone

Stone of Truth as a Stone of Washing

Green and White: Canonical Colors

Locating the Duat (Dat)

A Series of Washings?

The Hall of Geb and the Hall of Shu (Creation Room)

Commentary Part 3. The Creation (Resurrection) of Man Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 20–22

Commentary: Dramatic Presentations in the Temple

Creation of the Earth and Creation of Man

The Creator Gods Re Comes Down

Atum Equals Adam?

Ptah the Creator

Amon

The Nšm.t-Bark Forms of Ritual Solar Ships and Their Use

Deification of the Ba, Meaning of Nṯr

The Formula “For Time and Eternity”

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 23–26

Commentary: The Enduring of the Name

Immortality of the Flesh

Eternal Progression

Light and Breath as Glory

Triads in the Book of Breathings

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 26–29

Commentary: The Ritual Meal Invocation Offerings

Fruits of the Field

Life-giving Food, the Heavenly Meal

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 38–41, 57–58

Commentary: The Awakening The Rising Sun Awakens All to Life

The Sleep of Sem and the Awakening of Adam

The Instructors Arrive

Enter the Lady

Maat as Wife and Mother

Awakening by the Rays of the Sun

The Temple as an Observatory

The Temple as a Powerhouse Light Penetrating the Darkness

The Sun-God in the Underworld

Commentary Part 4. The Garden Story Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 27, 37–38

Commentary: The Garden of Abundance

Lists of Food Offerings

The Lady in the Garden The Lady and the Tree

The Noble Ished-Tree and Other Sacred Trees

The Ritual Garden

The Lady Offers Fruit

Transformations

Adam’s Dominion: The Initiate as Lord of Plants and Animals

The Sacred Marriage (Hieros Gamos) in the Garden

Forbidden Fruit

The Serpent Punishment of the Serpent

The Flaming Sword

Commentary Part 5. The Long Road Back Awareness of the Fall: The “Way of Life” for the Living and the Dead

Initiation as a Journey

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 29–33

Commentary: Preparing for the Journey

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 34–37

Commentary: The Way Is Open, Wepwawet

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 41–43

Commentary: Travel Insurance, the Gods Cooperate

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 44–54

Commentary: They Equip Him with a Viaticum

Guides Are Provided for the Journey

Protection Is Guaranteed

Every Man a King

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 54–58

Commentary: Coronation Imagery The Initiate on the Throne in the Holy Land

In Full Ceremonial Regalia

Possessor of the Royal Ka

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 59–61

Commentary Admission to the Company of the Gods, the Elect Society

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 62–65

Commentary Having All Faculties Restored Forever

Commentary Part 6. The Fearful Passage A Dangerous and Toilsome Road

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 66–69

Commentary

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 69–72

Commentary: Dark Passages and Gates

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 72–73

Commentary

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 74–78

Commentary: Sacrifice by the Living and for the Candidate

Sacrifice as a Substitute Offering for the Candidate

Initiate’s Narrow Escapes from Sacrificial Death

The Arrested Sacrifice: Christian and Jewish Parallels

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 79–89

Commentary: The Challenge at the Seven Deadly Gates, The Negative Confession

Seven Sins and Seven Monsters

The Ritual Combat: Its Various Forms

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 90–93

Commentary: Psychostasy: The Initiate Is Pronounced Guiltless

Righteousness and Morality

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 93–97

Commentary: The Initiate Is Admitted to the Duat

Commentary Part 7. Culmination and Conclusion Instructions for Wrapping

Papyrus Louvre N. 3284 lines 98–108

Commentary

The Lake of Khonsu, Osiris as Sokar

Khonsu

Symbolic Wrappings and Veils

Ritual Embraces

The Last Barrier: The Temple Veils

Seeing the God: The Culmination of the Mysteries

Description of the Embrace

Words Spoken at the End

The ʿnḫ, Ḏd, and Ws Formula

Introduction to the Appendixes

Appendix 1. From the Dead Sea Scrolls (1QS) Description of the Rule of the Community

Return to the Ancient Order

Complete Commitment Required

Preliminary Meeting

Conditions of Admission

Going Over to the Next Phase

Admonition against Backsliding

Instructions to the Guide: The Creation Motif

The Way Back: A Rigorous and Dangerous Passage

The Priesthood in Charge

A Sacramental Meal

Rules of Behavior

Preparation for a True Temple

The Temple Represents the Eternal Order

The Preexistent Plan

Hymn of Creation

The Initiate as Adam

Combat and Tribulation: A Dreary World

Divine Guidance to a Glorious Goal

Glorified in the Presence of God

Appendix 2. From the Odes of Solomon Description of the Text

Nature and Purpose of the Book

Purification Rites

The Creation Motif

The Garden Drama

The Way Back

Tried and Tested

Concluding Rites

Appendix 3. The Pearl Description of the Text

The Situation

The First Primeval Childhood

The Dangerous Mission

The Fall of Man

Recalled by a Letter

The Road Back

Return to the Heavenly Home

The Mysterious Garment or Hanging

The Royal Embrace

Parallels in the Manichaean Kephalaia

Appendix 4. From the Pistis Sophia Nature of the Text

Purpose of the Writings

Purification Rites

The Creation of Man

The Garden and the Fall

The Road Back

Culminating Ordinances

Appendix 5. Cyril of Jerusalem’s Lectures on the Ordinances Nature of the Text

Purpose of the Writing

Purification

The Creation of Man

The Garden

The Way Back

Petition for Admission

Concluding Rites

The Clouded Mirror: Echoes in the Church Fathers

Appendix 6. From the Gospel of Philip Nature of the Text

Purpose of the Work

Purification, the Garden, Hieros Gamos, and the Fall

The Way Back

Recapitulation of Ordinances Applied to Adam

Applied to the Initiates

The Substitute (Arrested) Sacrifice

Sacred Embracing

Sacrifice Again

Concerning the Veil

Bibliography

=== END BOOK ===
