=== BEGIN BOOK ===
BOOK_ID: NIBLEY_CW_V15
TITLE: The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, Vol. 15 Apostles and Bishops in Early Christianity
FORMAT: TXT (normalized line endings; HTML entities unescaped)
NOTE: Use this file as the canonical source for retrieval/quoting.
=== END HEADER ===

© 2004 The Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies and Hugh Nibley and Associates, LC

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission in writing from the publisher, Deseret Book Company, P O. Box 30178, Salt Lake City, Utah 84130. This work is not an official publication of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The views expressed herein are the responsibility of the author and do not necessarily represent the position of the Church, of Deseret Book Company, of the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, or of the editors.

DESERET BOOK is a registered trademark of Deseret Book Company.

Visit us at deseretbook.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Nibley, Hugh, 1910–

Apostles and bishops in early Christianity / Hugh Nibley ; edited by

John F. Hall and John W. Welch.

p. cm. — (The collected works of Hugh Nibley ; v. 15) Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 1-59038-389-3 (hardbound : alk. paper)

1. Episcopacy—History of doctrines—Early church, ca. 30–

600.

2. Bishops—History—To 1500. 3. Apostolate (Christian theology)—History

of doctrines—Early church, ca. 30–600. 4. Apostles. I. Hall, John F. II.

Welch, John W. (John Woodland) III. Title.

BV670.3.N53 2004

262'.12'09015—dc22

2004023387

Printed in the United States of America 70582

Phoenix Color Corporation, Hagerstown, MD

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Contents

Editors’ Preface

Overview

The Office of Bishop in the Early

Christian Church as a Whole

The Waxing and Waning of the

“Consensus”

An Apostle Is Not the Same as a Bishop

When Bishops Became the Highest

Officers in the Church

Seeing James as the Presiding Bishop of

the Church

The Bishop as an Office in the Lower

Priesthood

Dependence on Jewish Sources for

Church Practices Relevant to the

Bishop

The Jewish and Worldly Origins of the

Office and Title of Bishop

Changes in the Office of Bishop

Roman Origin of a Divine Office?

The Importance of Each Bishop

Becomes Tied to the Prominence of

His City

The Fight for Power

In Search of a General Authority

The Glories (and Duties?) of a Bishop

Are the Council and the Synod the

Apostolic Voice?

The Gospel of Bigness and Power

The Office of Bishop in the Church in

Rome

In Search of a Missing Link

Questions about the Account of the

Ordination of Clement as a Bishop

Finding (or Not Finding) the Bishop (or

Bishops) of Rome

Strife over the Elections of the Bishop

of Rome

The Establishment of an Episcopal

Hierarchy and College of Cardinals

The Roman Role and the Big Four

The Double Apostolate: Peter and Paul

Clement to the Corinthians—Proof of

Roman Supremacy?

The Leading Role the Roman Church

Did Not Play

Establishing a Connection with Peter—

A Return to Matthew 16:18

Emperors, Popes, Synods, and Rome

Claims of Apostolic Succession

The Argument of Diffusion

Editors’ Postscript

Editors’ Preface

In 1954 Professor Hugh W. Nibley taught a

class at Brigham Young University about the

office of bishop in early Christianity. It is hard to imagine anyone better than Hugh

Nibley to shed light on this challenging and intriguing topic. Fortunately, as he prepared for class he typed his lectures virtually

word-for-word on his manual typewriter and

then read them out loud to his students in the old-school tradition of truly delivering a

“lecture” (in Latin, lectura means “words about to be read”). After these lectures were delivered, Nibley set these “notes” aside and went on to address other pressing demands

on his time. This publication now makes his

155 pages of typescript available for the first time.

Bishops were as important in early

Christianity as they are in the church today.

In the New Testament, the duties and desired attributes of the bishop are listed twice, once in Paul’s first letter to Timothy and again in his epistle to Titus. Bishops served during

the first Christian century in several areas of the eastern Mediterranean—Jerusalem,

Corinth, Philippi, Smyrna, Ephesus, and

Hieropolis. Catholics claim that Peter was

the first bishop of Rome, and Eastern

Orthodox Christians assert that he was the

first bishop of Antioch. Most likely, Peter

ordained the first bishops in both of these

major centers.

The importance of this subject is

exceeded, however, by its complexity and

obscurity. One grapples to understand how

those bishops functioned, what authority they

possessed, how they related to the apostles or other priesthood offices, and what

changes occurred in the course of the first

few centuries of the Christian era with

respect to these episcopal overseers.

Answers to these puzzles are buried deep

within the lines of many early Christian

writers, whose texts are often inaccessible to the general reader. While Nibley draws

attention to many revealing details in the

early patristic literature, his forays into these materials are adventuresome and exploratory

and thus were not intended to be definitive

or conclusive.

Although Professor Nibley never returned

to this research to see it through to

publication, the arguments he presented in

these lectures relate closely to other

materials he published around that same

time. In particular, The World and the

Prophets, volume 3 in the Collected Works

of Hugh Nibley, contains a series of weekly broadcasts entitled “Time Vindicates the

Prophets.” The broadcasts were delivered

on KSL Radio from 7 March to 17 October

1954, the same year in which this class on

the early Christian bishop was taught at

BYU. The broad historical and theological

developments charted in those radio talks

provide the background against which to

understand Nibley’s arguments concerning

the loss of prophetic gifts and apostolic

ministrations in the early church. Even more to the point, Mormonism and Early

Christianity, volume 4 of the Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, compiles his writings on early Christian historiography, notably his series from the Improvement Era called

“The Way of the Church” (1955) and his

article published in the prestigious journal Church History entitled “The Passing of the Primitive Church: Forty Variations on an

Unpopular Theme” (1961). His discussions on those pages concerning church history,

record keeping, censorship, forgery,

authority, change, and apostasy comprise the wider context in which he had approached

the more specific topic of the bishop in these lectures.

The style and tone of this typescript will

undoubtedly strike most readers as dated and coming from a previous era of academic

discourse, as we (and he) readily

acknowledge. Still, we believe that this

material is useful and interesting to

academicians for several reasons. These

pages display Nibley’s gifts as a lecturer

during his seventh year of instruction at

Brigham Young University. The sheer

tenacity and clarity required to type out one’s lecture notes in this degree of detail is

amazing. Few professors make such

preparations for class. This material also

reflects a great deal of research into the enduring primary sources, the results of

which are presented here in a logical,

sustained, flowing form of demonstration and argumentation. Of course, Nibley also drew

on and interacted with the secondary works

of Protestant scholars, and he often joined

with them in their attack on Catholic history and Catholic historians. But at the same time, he pushed the arguments far beyond the

positions that had been staked out by others, and he raised significant questions for future explorations concerning the history of early Christianity.

In 1997, John W. Welch first noticed these

pages among various other papers in

Nibley’s files, and they were examined and

deemed worthy to edit and publish. That

process has proceeded gradually over

several years. Several individuals have

contributed to the production of this edition,

and we acknowledge and appreciate their valuable contributions. Margaret Robertson,

an editorial assistant for BYU Studies,

checked and standardized each typed

manuscript page against an electronic

version and, in the process, expanded

abbreviations, regularized spelling, and

created new paragraphs, sections, and

subsections. Joseph Ponczoch worked on the

monumental task of determining the source of each quotation in the text and confirming the consistency of the manuscript’s arguments.

This proved truly formidable because fewer

than one of every twenty quotations in the

typescript included even minimal citation

information, and twenty-five to thirty breaks or textual gaps of varying proportions

existed in these lecture notes. Because of the condition of the original manuscript and the considerable interval of time since its

composition, we and our assistants (even

with Nibley’s suggestions) have been unable to locate the sources of all references and

have found it impossible to reconcile each

instance of missing text. Footnotes indicate those quotations that stem from still

unidentified sources. To the extent possible and appropriate, this rough text has been

edited to ensure fluid argumentation, smooth reading, and source documentation. Some

subheadings and clarifying translations have been added. The translations we have

provided appear in brackets.

In bringing this book through the

publication process, many others have

rendered extraordinary service. Shirley S.

Ricks and Sandra A. Thorne have been

sensitive and persistent in their editorial and managerial roles, insuring consistency,

clarity, and accuracy. Emily Ellsworth and

Paula W. Hicken have attended to the

difficult task of proofreading. Jeremy R.

Bird and Jacob D. Rawlins have met a number of challenges in typesetting these

pages with footnotes in Latin and Greek. We

also appreciate Phyllis Nibley’s keen eye in reviewing the page proofs.

Today, much of the research reflected in

these 1954 lectures would need to be

brought up to date, as the positions of all

these schools of thought and the ecumenical

relations between the churches have

migrated considerably during the intervening half century between the 1950s and now. 1

The reader should be mindful that these

writings are essentially lecture notes and do not constitute a finished product. Indeed,

further research and many new lines of

investigation remain to be pursued regarding the ecclesiastical structure of the early

church. By publishing this provocative and

significant Latter-day Saint scholarship from the mid-twentieth century, we do not wish to

provoke sectarian disputes; instead, we hope to facilitate and stimulate those further

discussions about the authority and functions of the early Christian bishop, while at the

same time advancing a fuller understanding

of the progression of Latter-day Saint

intellectual history. Readers will find these lecture notes just as informative and

engaging as the popular recordings and

published transcripts of Nibley’s later

lectures on the Book of Mormon and Pearl of

Great Price. For these and many other

reasons, including this material in the

Collected Works of Hugh Nibley seems more than justified, if not inescapable.

John F. Hall

John W. Welch

Notes

1. Suggested studies include Peter Brown, The Rise of Western Christendom, 2nd ed.

(Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2003); W. H. C.

Frend, The Rise of Christianity (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1984); Adrian Hastings, ed., A World History of Christianity (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1999); Philip Jenkins, The Next Christendom: The Coming of Global

Christianity (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002); Francis E. Peters, The Harvest of Hellenism (London: Allen and Unwin, 1972); and Rodney Stark, The Rise of

Christianity (San Francisco: HarperCollins, 1997).

Overview

Professor Nibley divided these 1954

lectures into two parts: in the first half of the course, he offered a broad investigation of

the duties and significance of apostolic and episcopal officers throughout the early

Christian church; in the second part he

focused on the same issues and their

particular manifestations in the church at

Rome. Overall, Nibley argues that the office of the apostle was one of general

jurisdiction, whereas the office of the bishop was local in nature; accordingly, bishops

could not be the automatic successors of the apostles when that office was lost from the

church. All attempts to ascribe supremacy to

the bishop of the Roman Church surface many centuries later than the era of Peter in Rome and arise concurrently with what

Nibley calls the “gospel of bigness and

power” that ultimately overshadowed the

councils and synods.

Part 1: The Office of Bishop in the

Early Christian Church as a Whole

Part 1 begins by summarizing pertinent

perspectives of Catholic and Protestant

scholars who have wrestled with basic

issues in early Christian ecclesiastical

history. Two theories of how church

organization developed coexisted in the late nineteenth century. The prevailing consensus proclaimed that the early Christian church

had developed its hierarchical organization

through imitating and adopting broad elements of contemporary Jewish and pagan

society. The minority view propounded the

“presidential hypothesis,” which suggested that the church developed its hierarchical

organization through accommodation by

adapting the Jewish college of presbyters to create an organization, of which the bishop

was the presiding member in early Christian

communities. Though all parties agreed that

Christ had established an ecclesia—a society or church of some kind—most

disagreed regarding its actual organization.

Many, in fact, posited an absence of any

formal church organization. This lack of

consensus undermines the strength of

prevailing scholarly opinions and opens the

way for a reexamination of the two main

offices in question, the apostle and the

bishop.

The discussion then focuses on the

relationship between apostolic and

episcopal officers in the years immediately

following the resurrection of Jesus and

investigates how each office derived from Jewish and pagan religious and

administrative traditions. Nibley adduces

numerous sources supporting his contention

that apostles traveled, were sent out into all the world, and were special delegates who

supervised the work of local church officers.

Moreover, he emphasizes that local churches

were not individual corporate societies but

constituent branches of the kingdom of God

on earth, functioning under the direction of the apostles. The Twelve Apostles were not

mere general messengers or missionaries,

but specially commissioned delegates of

Jesus Christ. “All concede that the apostles were men of unique station and endowment

—special witnesses possessing prophetic

gifts” (p. 13, below). Early Christian

apostles concerned themselves more with the

spiritual organization of the church than with its physical structure and local

administration.

Nibley then shows that the early Christians

understood two kinds of priesthood, one

general and the other local, one higher and

the other lower, one apostolic and the other episcopal. Bishops and bishoprics in the

early Christian church served a purpose very different from that of the apostles. After the deaths of the apostles, the men who

eventually came to function as the highest

officers in the church had initially exercised only local administrative authority in accord with their ordination under the hands of

various apostles. As the Latin title episcopus (Greek έπίσκοπος, meaning “overseer”)

implies, bishops’ duties were supervisory

and protective; they kept watch over the

flock of saints and gave warning and counsel when trouble arose. Deacons and priests

were ordained and made responsible to

assist the bishops, just as Christ and the

apostles were to assist the Father. It was Adolf von Harnack who defined this

distinction when he recognized the presence

of two levels of authority, or priesthoods,

within the early church. Apostles, prophets, and teachers, he noted, were traveling,

general, spiritual authorities; bishops,

priests, and deacons, on the other hand, were local, administrative, judicial authorities.

Thus the respective natures of the apostolic and episcopal offices were initially quite

different: the former itinerant, the latter

localized; the one spiritual, the other

temporal.

From this it follows that the office of the

bishop was different in kind, not just in

degree or assignment, from that of the

apostle. Consequently, the death or

disappearance of all the apostles caused a

serious stir in church organization. Each

remaining church officer did not simply

ascend one metaphorical rung on the hierarchical ladder of ecclesiastical

responsibility and authority to fill the void; rather, they all retained their customary

measure of responsibility and authority, at

least for a time. The era of the apostolic

fathers ensued, characterized by a noticeable absence of any general ecclesiastical

authority. Ignatius, Clement, Polycarp, and

other bishops originally ordained by one or

another apostle continued to plead with

churches in other locales to repent and to be obedient. However, they made such appeals

only as concerned friends and observers,

never presuming to issue orders “as an

apostle.” 1 Not one of these early apostolic church fathers ever appealed to his

episcopal office to lend authority to his

instructions to churches outside his local

jurisdiction. Indeed, they demur from such

action, specifically noting their lack of

authority to so function. As Nibley demonstrates, these men who received

authority directly from apostles recognize

that they do not possess apostolic authority, but only that of local officers.

Nibley sees James, the bishop of

Jerusalem, as an interesting exception to the normal rule, suggesting that James served

simultaneously as a local bishop and also in a general church capacity. According to

numerous early sources, James, brother of

the Lord, was chosen and ordained bishop of

Jerusalem by Peter, James, and John and was

thereafter shown particular respect and

honor, for James not only was given

episcopal authority—that is, temporal and

administrative authority—over Jerusalem,

but he also was given charge over the

temporal affairs of all cities with Christian churches. Thus, Peter ordered Clement to

send to James word of Clement’s ordination

under Peter’s hands. Under James’s supervision, general church councils may

have been held. Although not a traveling

authority, he was a general authority. Nibley explains the position of James by

comparison with the office of the presiding

bishop in the restored Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 2

The lectures next explore the origins of the office of bishop in terms of Jewish roots and pagan connections. Indeed, many early

Christian church offices were adapted

primarily from Judaism and secondarily

from Hellenic and Mesopotamian

institutions. The nature of the episcopal

office in its earliest Christian manifestations bears out its Jewish origins. Nibley

proposes that since Old Testament times, the title of bishop was applied to a limited,

commissioned overseer who examines and

reports local conditions to a higher authority.

In the early Christian church, this office differed greatly from the spiritual

stewardship of apostles, prophets, and

teachers. Bishops were ordained and

commissioned by the apostles in order to

relieve them of temporal concerns and to

permit them to focus on spiritual cares. Thus Peter was said to have ordained Linus,

Cletus, and Clement to perform episcopal

functions in his stead in Rome.

It was such temporal status that led to an

overall secularization and despiritualization of the role and behavior of bishops,

especially as civic prominence and civil

borrowings engendered competing claims,

struggles, and pride. From the earliest days of the church, a bishop was associated with

a city for which he had responsibility or

stewardship. As a result, each city

associated itself ever increasingly with its bishop, and the public nature of the

episcopal office encouraged each bishop, particularly in Rome and in important

provincial cities, to perform his duties with magisterial dignity and to become a model of behavior, as if he were a political

magistrate. The fact that ecclesiastical

boundaries usually corresponded with

political boundaries surely encouraged the

association of ecclesiastical offices with

political magistracies. The correlation

between ecclesiastical and political office

grew even more apparent when the public

election of bishops, and the riotous throng

that accompanied each election, became

routine. Nevertheless, the primacy of any one bishop over all others remained unheard of

for many centuries.

Part 1 thus concludes with an exposition of

the gradual changes that occurred in the

qualifications, selection, functions, and

duties of bishops, along with the

accompanying accumulation of honors heaped upon each bishop and the

development of episcopal councils and

synods as the primary means of governing

the entire Christian church in the absence of any acknowledged general authorities. By

the fourth century, the principle that a bishop was more important if he came from an

important city had become a guiding, though

unwritten, principle of the general church.

One catalyst of this process was the

increased convening of local councils and

synods, beginning in the latter half of the

second century. For such councils, the

bishops of cities within a particular province generally gathered to the capital city of that province. Under these circumstances, the

bishop of the provincial capital presided. By the middle of the third century, general

councils were being held annually. During

this era measures of supremacy in council

shifted from the age of a city’s church to such factors as the fame of its origin, its proximity to other churches, and its political

significance. However, there existed no

standing rule of hierarchy within these

councils.

Nibley portrays Constantine as virtually a

self-proclaimed bishop, who came to assure

resolution of doctrinal disputes that in a

succession of previous councils and synods

had failed to be mediated. This view of

Nicaea was prevalent in the 1950s. While

current scholarly hypothesis continues to

accept Eusebius’s depiction of the emperor

as divinely appointed, a sort of earthly vice-regent of heaven, a variety of issues

including the reliability of Eusebius’s

account, complicate reconstructing the events of the Nicene council or their implication for the actual or theoretical authority of bishops.

That Constantine’s temporal power was the

essential determinant of episcopal compromise is undisputed. Moreover, the

emperor’s invitation for attendance to

bishops from throughout the Roman Empire

clearly established the precedent for future churchwide councils.

Ecumenical councils met regularly after

the Council of Nicaea and continued to

bestow ever greater power on the church and

some of its officials. In the absence of

apostolic authority, councils and synods

became the means of governing the entire

church. The increasing authority that

accompanied the resolutions of these

meetings strengthened in the minds of many

the belief that “whatever [was] done in the

holy synods of the bishops [had] the force of the divine will itself.” 3 Hence the arguments for authenticity began to emphasize numbers:

“Whatever such a large number of bishops

agrees on must be taken as arrived at not

automatically, but by God’s suggestion.” 4 In this guise surfaced the “gospel of bigness

and power.”

Part 2: The Office of Bishop in the

Church in Rome

In part 2, Nibley discusses the same

problems and developments in ecclesiastical

authority and jurisdiction as in part 1 by

analyzing specifically the controversial

emergence of episcopal authority at Rome,

which was ultimately manifested in the

papacy. He points out difficulties in the

Roman Catholic search for the “missing

link” between Peter and the first bishops of Rome, raises questions about the account of

the purported ordination of Clement by Peter as his successor, and compares the primacy

of the Roman Church with that of three other major Christian churches (at Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch).

The bishopric of Rome demands particular attention for its increasingly insistent claims of ecclesiastical supremacy. Roman

Catholics have long claimed Peter as the

source of their authority and have supported this claim by quoting certain words of the

Lord to Peter indicating his future presidency in the church. Of course, Roman Catholic

scholars acknowledge that the issue lies not in Peter’s relation to the Lord but in Peter’s relation to Clement and to the church at

Rome. At issue are the details of that fateful moment of transmission, not from Christ to

Peter, but from Peter to his successor.

Missing is evidence indicating whether Peter ever was bishop of Rome and, if so, whether

Clement immediately succeeded Peter in that

office. That link should also clarify the

offices and duties of Linus, Cletus, Clement, and Peter—all four of whom allegedly held

office in Rome simultaneously—and provide

further information why Peter ordained Clement to the office of bishop rather than

apostle, if he had intended for Clement to

replace him as the leader of the entire

Christian church.

A spurious letter from Clement to James

attempts to clarify many of these issues but, according to several scholars, is a contrived document that lacks evidentiary standing.

There are several versions of this letter of Clement to James the Just, bishop in

Jerusalem, in which Clement describes his

ordination at Peter’s hand and reports the

instructions received from Peter’s mouth

shortly before the great apostle’s death. In each version, Peter directs Clement to write James as soon as he (Peter) is dead,

explaining his qualifications for the

episcopal office and the experiences he has

had with Peter in Rome. Clement assures

James that he has been a close, personal

friend and apprentice to the apostle—“Tell James not to worry,” advises Peter, “because a well-trained man has taken my place. ”5

Nibley observes that arguments attributed to Clement emphasize his own temporal

preparation and overlook the more important

requirement of spiritual selection and

confirmation. Moreover, he asserts that these letters stand as evidence that a transition

took place between the end of the first

century and the beginning of the third century, particularly in Rome, whereby bishops

replaced the apostles as people of paramount influence in the Christian church.

Indeed, the episcopal lists for the early

Roman Church differ significantly. Peter,

Linus, Cletus, and Clement generally begin

each list, but their order often varies (on

some, Linus follows Cletus), their names

often vary (some texts read Anacletus

instead of Cletus), and the dates marking the

beginnings of their respective ministries always vary (no dates, in fact, are certain

until the early third century). Each version of the spurious letter of Clement to James

identifies its writer as the third bishop to follow Peter in Rome, identifying him as a

successor to Linus and Cletus as well as to

Peter. And beyond all this, the nature and

duration of Peter’s presence in Rome is

historically unclear.

According to Nibley, the complete

absence of any clear principle of episcopal

succession in Rome is attested by the

immense strife and confusion that attended

the election of bishops in that city. As

occurred elsewhere throughout the empire,

elections were often accompanied by

bribery, rioting, senatorial and imperial

intervention, and competition among elective bodies. For a millennium, the papal

succession rested variously in the hands of

European monarchs, Italian noblemen, affluent families, city mobs, successful

generals, and scheming churchmen. The

twelfth century saw the establishment of a

college of cardinals composed of the most

influential bishops, in whose hands the

selection of the successor to a deceased

pope eventually came to rest. In theory these men formed a council comparable to the

Twelve Apostles, though they themselves

never presumed apostolic origins.

Episcopal hierarchy was established from

the bottom up rather than from the top down, and the case of Rome was no exception.

Nibley emphasizes that the bishop de facto, if not de jure, succeeded the apostle as the highest office in the church merely by

default. For centuries, Roman Church

officials possessed only nominal prominence

in councils and synods. It was not until late in the fourth century that bishops of Rome

successfully advanced the doctrine of Petrine succession even in the West. The

independence of Hilary and Augustine, two

western bishops, is clear evidence of the

equal authority of various episcopacies.

Antioch, Constantinople, and Alexandria all

enjoyed prestige and prominence equal to or

greater than that of Rome. These four cities stood together—never alone—as the largest

and greatest churches. Each church

independently claimed primacy and

constantly harped on the theme of their

individual priority and precedence, but no

church ever attained such official acclaim

because of opposition from the others. Every attempt by Rome to assert its supremacy was

matched at one time or another by the

churches in Antioch, Constantinople, and

Alexandria.

In time, the arguments of eminence and

preeminence were no longer based on city

size but rather on whether a church had been founded by an apostle or subsequently by

someone else. And when cities started

appealing to their apostolic foundations as

proof of superior merit, the principle of

equality was quashed by the useful fiction of the “double apostolate.” Constantinople took fourth place by this criterion, because Peter had lived in each of the other three but never in the new imperial capital, the New Rome.

Although Peter exercised his authority at

Antioch years before taking residence at

Rome, nevertheless Antioch was, on grounds

of size and power, accorded the stature of

the third city of Christendom, while, because of Mark’s legendary role in founding its

Christian community under Peter’s direction, Alexandria, larger and more important than

Antioch, was considered the second most

important see. In this contest, Rome came in first because that city could claim the

simultaneous missionary service of both Peter and Paul.

In spite of this and other claims, no solid

case can be made for the early primacy of

Rome. Nibley points out that if there had

been a general church authority to succeed

the apostles, the apostolic fathers would

certainly have made mention of that authority and confronted him with their concerns. In

the first generation after the apostles,

individual bishops like Clement write to

offer advice to churches in locales over

which they do not preside, giving that advice as brothers in Christ rather than as those in authority. Nibley argues that this stands as proof of the absence of churchwide authority.

Clearly Clement’s letters to the Corinthians in no way compare in authority to Paul’s

letters to the same body. The letters of

Clement to the church at Corinth echo the

distressed, yet unauthoritative, petitions of

Ignatius, Polycarp, Irenaeus, and others. No one claimed apostolic or other general

ecclesiastical authority, but each bishop

justified himself by feelings of love and

urgency.

If ever there was an opportunity for Rome

to assert her claim, the Council of Nicaea

was it, Nibley claims. Had the primacy of

Rome been a fact, she would have resolved

all the most burning controversies of the first four centuries by appeal to her own priority.

She could not claim that authority, however, and as tensions increased, church fathers

began proposing different criteria for

authority, such as size of the church or city, antiquity of the church, origin of the church, or location of the church. Moreover, if Rome were the seat of general authority within the church, it is odd that, time and again, Rome did not play the leading role one would have expected.

Although Roman Catholic scholars of the past have attempted to prove that popes

convened all synods, it is clear that

emperors summoned at least the first eight.

And in fact, all six reasons for calling a

universal synod (general heresy, papal

disagreement, crusade, papal heresy,

cardinals stalling elections, or reform)

would have been obviated if the Roman

Church had been acknowledged from the

beginning as the divinely established head.

The clearest and boldest Roman claims of

papal supremacy appeared in the fourteenth

century, beginning with the bull Unam

Sanctam of 1302. The tardiness of such a bold proclamation bespeaks the authoritative uncertainty that reigned in the church left

behind by the apostles.

Supporters of the Roman position have

never failed to return to Matthew 16:18 to

substantiate their claim of preeminence.

Roman Catholics and their opponents both agree that the all-important phrase in that

verse is not “thou art Peter” but “the gates of hell shall not prevail.” The rock, Nibley

mentions, is always identified with

revelation, never with Peter himself. But

regardless of these details, Protestant

scholars have clearly demonstrated that no

argument for spiritual supremacy grounded

itself on this verse during the first three

centuries.

Finally, the ecclesiastical histories clearly manifest that disharmony was prevalent in

the early centuries of Christianity. So also, according to Nibley, the writings of the

apostolic and early church fathers abound

with uncertainty and confusion regarding any source of central authority or leadership.

Fourth-century claims of apostolic

succession are unconvincing, as much with

respect to Rome as anywhere else in the

early Christian world. Arguments used anciently to assert catholic orthodoxy, for

example, by virtue of the diffusion of

uniform gospel teachings throughout the

church, actually provide evidence against the presence of some churchwide authority

within the system, which had it existed

should have been mentioned in such a

context. Countless bishops composed letters

of warning, instruction, and chastisement,

both to single churches specifically and to

all churches universally, but they never

presume to speak with, or recognize in

another, apostolic authority. These bishops

appealed to the members of the church solely in the name of love, concern, or fear, and, by the fourth century, the best counsel any one of them could offer was to follow tradition and obey the voice of the council and the synod.

John F. Hall

John W. Welch

Joseph Ponczoch

Notes

1. Ignatius, Epistola ad Philadelphenses, in Patrologiae Cursus Completus … Series Graeca, ed. J.-P. Migne, 161 vols. (Paris: Migne, 1857–66), 5:828 (hereafter PG).

2. Nibley’s view that James may have held a general church office similar to that of the current Latter-day Saint presiding bishop is conjectural. His argument rests on the

evidence of a spurious document that makes

mention of Peter’s reporting to James the

ordination of Clement as a bishop at Rome. A more reliable source, Eusebius ( Ecclesiastical History, 2.1.2–5), identifies James as the first bishop at Jerusalem and cites Clement of

Alexandria as providing information that

James was ordained under the hands of Peter, James, and John. While James certainly at

some time occupied episcopal office, one

should note that “Paul attributed to James

General Authority status as an Apostle. He

reported that on the occasion of a visit to

Jerusalem when he abode with Peter for fifteen days, ‘others of the Apostles saw I

none, save James the Lord’s brother’ (Gal.

1:19)… . James, the brother of the Lord,

whether he served as bishop of Jerusalem, or Presiding Bishop of the Church, obviously

came to receive a calling to join the Twelve.”

John F. Hall, New Testament Witnesses of Christ: Peter, John, James, and Paul

(American Fork, UT: Covenant

Communications, 2002), 180–81.

3. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.20, in PG

20:1080.

4. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 4.12, in PG 67:492.

5. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum 19, in PG

2:56.

1

The Office of Bishop in the

Early Christian Church as a

Whole

It is astonishing how little is known about

the nature and organization of the early

church. So little is known, in fact, that a

large and influential number of Protestant

churchmen were able to maintain for many

years that there never was a church in the

time of Christ and the apostles. By the same reasoning some of them also concluded that

Jesus had never lived. But there is a great

difference between a little information and

none at all, and today [1954] it is not only generally agreed that there was a church, but also that the church organization was all-

important in the ministry of the Lord and the apostles.

The Waxing and Waning of the

“Consensus”

Ernest Renan, in the spirit of nineteenth-

century liberalism, claimed that the early

Christians “knew little else than the law of love. ”1 J. B. Lightfoot had suggested the theory that “the episcopate was formed not

out of the apostolic order by localisation, but out of the presbyterial by elevation. ”2 That is, the bishop was not an office bestowed

from above by general authority, but one that grew up locally. This was the “presidential

hypothesis”—that each church had its own

college of elders governing it, of which the bishop was merely the president. 3 The church was thus a local community, a human

society, and nothing more; everything was

interpreted in purely political terms. This

theory proposed that churches existed because they were found by experience to be

a practical expedient and for no other

reason: “The church can exist without any

organization, but the church cannot persist

without organization.” 4 The prevailing doctrine of the 1880s, designated by Olof

Linton as the “Consensus,” went even

further. The high church theory of that time was that the foundation of the early church

was the necessary and indispensable office

of preacher. The Consensus abolished both

that and the apostolate and, says Linton,

thereby abolished the religious nature of the church! “The church organization is a purely secular [profane] structure.” 5 Edwin Hatch, in The Organization of the Early Christian Churches (1881), claimed that the church developed by a gradual evolution and did so

by absorbing elements which were already

present in the society, following pagan and

especially Jewish patterns. 6

Rudolf Sohm went to the opposite extreme

while still denying the church any real

organization. Ekklesia means public

assembly, “the ruling popular assembly of

the Greek city state,” 7 and its equivalent is the Hebrew qāhāl, “the solemn assembly in the presence of God of the people of

Israel. ”8 This is the sense of ekklesia in the New Testament. Sohm states that “the word

has no social content but is purely

dogmatic.” 9 Any idea of a local community can have nothing to do with this idea of the church: “Only the church is organized, … but it cannot be put into any legal organizational structure. ”10 Karl Holl argued that the Twelve were historical but that they had no

office. Holl agreed with Sohm’s theory of

absolute opposition between Amt [office]

and Geist [spirit]11—a theory which Adolf

von Harnack easily disproved.12 On the other hand, Roland Schütz said “the Twelve”

was all office and therefore could not be

historical. 13 So there were two schools: the apostolate was genuine but not hierarchic, or it was hierarchic but not genuine.

A standard statement of the case was that

of Otto Scheel in 1912: “The churches,” he

said, “were corporations, that is, societies.

They arose independently [ autonom] and spontaneously side by side. There was no

common bond between them. Every church

chose its own officers.” 14 Against this Johannes Weiss “discovered” that for Jesus

the kingdom of God was no mere community

of pious people but a divine institution. That meant that the kingdom and the church must

be very different things—the one spiritual,

the other official. 15 Harnack objected: what is wrong with having Amt and Geist together in the same institution—even dependent on

each other? 16 The scholars simply could not see it: it had to be one or the other.

Those involved in the great controversy

granted that there was a church, but

disagreed over whether that posited an

organization. The church by its very nature is an organization. The phenomena of primitive

Christianity cannot be explained on any but a corporational basis: there are motions

passed, elections, etc. This is the “spirit”

controversy: the charisma as a free, formless principle versus the idea that the

Spirit can and does bring about order, law,

and discipline.

Today the tendency is no longer to regard

the church as a late emergence but to seek its origin even in the time of Jesus. In all camps, the dependence of the individual is now

being emphasized. It was Harnack who

started this: “The development goes from the whole to the part.” 17 “Ekklesia, ” says Sohm,

means “Gesamtkirche, of which the local churches are only copies. ”18 Harnack, Pierre Batiffol, Henri Leclercq, and Wilhelm

Koester oppose Sohm and believe that

ekklesia in Matthew 18:17 refers to a single local church but that the idea of the general church was derived from it—and that it

happened very soon, in time to be used by

Paul. 19 Opposing the Consensus, Sohm said that Gemeindebeschlüsse [local community decisions] were merely local

Anerkennungshandlungen [confirmatory procedures], accepting central decrees. He

points to the basic primitive Christian belief that the church must act as a totality, a unit: a majority vote is not enough—the minority

always joins the majority so that all things are done in perfect unanimity. 20 The Consensus had identified authority with the

force of personality (the personality of Jesus, of Paul, etc.), but it is now recognized that

this is not the early Christian view, which always traces the authority to a gift from God and insists that it rests on God’s approval.

The Consensus has modernized, or

humanized, the idea of “charisma.” 21 “The local branch is a reproduction of the

heavenly ekklesia. Therefore, it must be organized just like the Gesamtekklesia: The local society [ward] is a scale model of the church.” 22 This is the present state of things.

To support this, Theodor Schermann

observes that without an organization there

would be no rites, no ordinances, no

liturgy. 23 Hans Lietzmann notes that the earliest records speak of the process by

which one joins the church, an

Aufnahmeritus that meets us fully developed in the Acts and in the Epistles and that

without a definite and even strict

organization would be impossible. This is

not, however, apparent in the Gospels, says

Lietzmann;24 yet T. W. Manson notes in 1950

that it is precisely in the Gospels that “we begin with the fact that Jesus did gather a

community around himself during the course of his ministry; and we may well ask what it was, if it was not the church… . It will not do to regard this group merely as the more or less regular disciples of a somewhat

unorthodox travelling Rabbi… . The more

the Synoptic evidence is studied, the more

clearly the fact emerges that what Jesus

created was something more than a new

theological school. It was a religious

community, of which he was the leader. ”25

“It is plain,” Kirsopp Lake wrote in 1911,

“that a community which is momentarily

expecting a complete and catastrophic

change in the character of society is unlikely to possess more than the necessary minimum

of organization; it is not less plain that as soon as this expectation passes into the

background the need of organization will be increasingly felt.” 26 This is typical of the orthodox theological seminary type of

thought: of course it is plain, other things being equal (but the mission of the Lord

means nothing if it does not mean that other things are not equal). The Lord prescribed a special organization, however illogical that might seem to the man in the seminary. When

the parousia [second coming] failed to transpire, according to Lake, then it was

plain that an organization was indicated—yet precisely at this time the organization

disappeared, leaving the church in a vacuum

until the fourth century.

An Apostle Is Not the Same as a

Bishop

To all the world. Holl, pointing to the well-known fact that the earliest Christian

church was a missionary organization, drew

the obvious conclusion that “no missionary church begins with autonomous branches.” 27

Missionary work spreads from a center and

is concerned with bringing others into a

well-defined group. 28 Apostle means missionary, and the whole activity of the

apostles is conditioned by this fact, which of course posits the existence of a church. They succeeded in converting the world,

according to present Catholic doctrine, “not gradually and by successive instruction,”

according to Giovanni Battista Pighi, “but by the interior instruction of God in an instant.

Suddenly … all nations which are under

heaven heard and believed in the Son of

God.” 29 He quotes John Chrysostom to prove this, forgetting the worried conclusion that Chrysostom draws from this interesting

premise: “If that is so, then the end should have come long ago, since it was explicitly

stated that when the apostles had once

preached to all nations, then would the end come.” 30 Chrysostom’s only possible conclusion, which he swallows with a wry

face, is that the apostles cannot have

accomplished their mission after all, since

the church is still on the earth.

But all agree that the apostles did spend

their time preaching to the nations and then passed away, almost all at once and

suddenly, leaving no apostles in their place.

The apostles must have been special officers of some sort, it is assumed. Their work was

closely centralized in Jerusalem—the main

office to which we may assume they would

repair for yearly conferences to make reports on their missions in the presence of the

whole church and to which at other times

they would steadily send written reports on

their work. The gathering of Israel and Judah was the missionary work of the apostles,

says Eusebius (confusing the first with the

second coming of Christ and forgetting, as all do, that the specific nature of their

mission is very clearly stated in the

scriptures many times). Eusebius goes on to

describe how later they came together and

worked at uniting the church, “no longer

going forth as they had done originally.” 31

Special delegates. Many studies have shown the name apostle, when specifically applied to the Twelve, to mean more than a

messenger or missionary—it means a

“special delegate.” “Our Lord was not

introducing a new term but adopting one

which from its current usage would suggest

to His hearers the idea of a highly

responsible mission,” wrote Lightfoot. 32

Further investigators have come to almost

general agreement that the genius of the

apostolic office was that the holder of it was a special witness. There were many

“apostles,” as we read in the Didache; but

the Twelve, “the perfect year of the Lord,”

were something very special. “At the present time,” says Peter in the Clementine

Recognitions, “do not look for any other prophet or apostle except us. There is one

true prophet and twelve apostles.” 33 He explains that no one is to be accepted as a

true missionary who does not have a duly

signed certificate from the main office at

Jerusalem.34

The discovery of the Didache led Holl to conclude, and most Protestant scholars now

concur, that the apostolic authority did not come (as was once thought) purely as a

charismatic gift, but that it was an ordained office along with all its spirituality.35 From the beginning, wrote Lietzmann, “the Twelve

appear as a compact group in which only

three men stand out as individuals. These

were,” he says, “Peter, James, and John, the pillars of the primitive church.” 36 The

importance of these three is significant. It puzzled the experts from the first that while the office of apostle had to be accompanied

by the gift of prophecy, it did not come

spontaneously in a spiritual way nor was

there among the apostles a perfect equality; in fact, the Twelve removed any validity to

the claim that all believers must have been of equal spiritual authority. There was a

definite hierarchy in the earliest church (Acts 5:22). The church is a totality and acts not as a majority but as a unit, Harnack noticed; but at the same time, “the church was an

abgestufte Totalität [hierarchical entity].” 37

While we see in the church a definite local

organization, wrote Eduard Meyer, “the

highest authority was held by the Twelve,

and at their head was Peter.” 38 Harnack’s thorough study of non-Christian sources

regarding Peter showed that he was far and

away the most important man in the church.

After he and James were dead for at least twenty-four years, Eusebius specifically

states that “John the beloved returned from

Patmos and continued to govern the

churches.” 39 He cites a very old source telling how, as long as an apostle remained

alive, the spoilers and dissenters had to

content themselves with lurking in dark

corners, only to throw off all disguise and

come out boldly into the open the moment the last apostle was dead. 40 Plainly the apostles had a kind of authority that none of their

successors had. They were conceived of as

the twelve judges of Israel and so were

limited to that number.

The persistence of Jewish ideas in the

church is now more recognized. Harnack and

Sohm both recognized that the missionary

pattern of the church was that of the Jews

and not that of the Hellenistic local missions of traveling wise men and reformers. On the

other hand, Holl noted that while the Jewish system might also have produced “apostles

of the churches,” it could not possibly have produced “apostles of Jesus Christ,” which

was something absolutely unique. 41 A Jewish scholar, Hermann Vogelstein, has shown that

the general idea of an apostle as “an

authorized representative” was familiar to

the Jews, that it was not a “mystical”

concept, and that an apostle could only be

one actually sent out by Christ himself. 42

Vogelstein, being unmindful of the direct

nature of Paul’s calling as a missionary, says that Paul changed all that. 43 However, among the Jews, according to Vogelstein, “the name of apostle does not confer an absolute

position, but it merely determines his

relationship to one who assigned him his

commission.” 44 This, he concludes, makes the Christian apostle an office entirely

dependent on Christ and not a Jewish

institution at all. Mark 3:14, Vogelstein notes, shows that the apostolic office “is as original as Jesus himself.” 45

General officers. From the fact that “the apostles went from place to place without

remaining long anywhere,” Harnack says

there are three possibilities to be deduced: (1) they went forth without any care for the future, (2) they committed the direction of the church to local men (this would explain

James the Just), or (3) they kept the direction of things in their own hands. Harnack thinks the first of these is the most likely, though

“the second possibility was at a very early

date accepted as normal procedure. ”46 The third possibility appears in Paul’s writings and in the general directorate at Jerusalem

under James. Jerusalem was always very

important. But on one thing all are agreed:

the apostles were traveling general

authorities, “essentially itinerant,” “a

nomadic apostolate,” “a fraternity officiating in the establishment of a worldwide

institution, forming itself everywhere into

identical Christianities, cooperating among

themselves, having the same faith, the same

cult, the same authorities. ”47 This is a surprising thing, says Batiffol: “Christianity was born catholic.” 48 But if the system was so strong and so workable, why did it

suddenly disappear? “In the earliest times,”

writes Louis Duchesne, “there was a

perpetual circulation of apostles, of

missionaries, of prophets, of teachers. ”49

This work was within the church, please

note, not merely to the Gentiles. “But when

the first age of the church passed away, this itinerant, ubiquitous [i.e., general] personnel disappeared entirely, and nothing was left

but the local ecclesiastical organizations.” 50

What had happened? Didn’t the church need

general officers anymore? Could they be

trusted independently to follow the right path? As we know, this led to frightful

results. And there was to be no more general authority until such authority emerged in the fifth century in “the great Babylon of the

West, so accursed to the Jewish prophets. ”51

The cold comfort to the church with the

passing of the apostles was that if the

apostolate was gone, other offices remained, and that these offices were not invented to

fill the apostolic vacuum but had existed

alongside the apostolic office from the very beginning. Yet the antiquity and authenticity of these ancient offices was a very strong

argument against their possibly representing a succession to the apostles. Bishops,

priests, teachers, and deacons had functioned for many years during the lifetimes of the

apostles. In no way did they compete with or duplicate the work of apostles—they had

their own work to do, and it was a full-time

job. To expect them over and above that to take over the totally different business of

governing the general church was out of the

question. Duchesne comments on the

perplexing fact that the great bishopric of

Rome, while equipped with all the offices

and machinery necessary for the

administration of a city bishopric, had not

the slightest trace of the equipment, offices, assistants, and traditions necessary for

running a church.52 What makes this disturbing is that Jerusalem from the

beginning did have such an administrative

setup. But no one expected the bishop of any city to take over the work of an apostle. This is amusingly shown in the famous forged

letters of Clement to James, in which Peter is represented as assuming the bishopric of

Rome only to leave the city immediately

after having appointed no less than three

bishops to act in his place since he had to be

about the business of an apostle and could not possibly spend his days in the city.53

All concede that the apostles were men of

unique station and endowment—special

witnesses possessing prophetic gifts. When

men thus endowed were removed, who

could take their place? An Ersatz

[substitute] was necessary, Sohm observed,

and “from this necessity arose the

episcopate.” The bishop is therefore “a

highly spiritual substitute, the direct

predecessor of our present-day pastors. ”54

But how can one be a spiritual substitute?

Only by a spiritual calling and ordination,

Sohm decided: The bishop must have been a

presbyter, but his office does not belong to the presbyters (as the “presidential school”

maintained). The presbyters are only a social class enjoying an honorable position in the

society. 55 Thus Sohm amended Harnack: there were two priesthoods, but they were

both spiritual. This is Sohm’s usual incapacity to see any possibility of

reconciliation between Amt and Geist, now seen as a quaint myopia: no necessary

conflict exists between the two which, far

from being mutually exclusive, may well be

mutually dependent. Many have insisted that

the episcopate and the presbyterian offices

were identical. Certainly in very early

sources the “successors” of the apostles are consistently depicted as the “presbyters.” In the agape [church], says the Apostolic Constitutions, the presbyters represent the apostles “as counselors of the bishop and the crown of the church, for they are the

sanhedrin and council of the church. ”56

But this sort of equivalence has nothing at

all to do with actual succession. Harnack

had noted that the local church is but a scale model of the main church if it has officers

whose relationships to each other

correspond to the relationships of higher functionaries. 57 They certainly do not share the power of those functionaries, which they only reflect or resemble. The fact that all

share the same spirit does not mean, as is so commonly maintained, that all share the same office, authority, and function. Thus the

reader takes his portion at the agape “in honor of the prophets,” 58 the pastor or bishop receives his share “as a priest, ”59 the deacons receive double shares “as the

reward of Christ,” 60 and the laymen must make any appeals to authority to the deacons only, since God can only be approached

through his Son, Christ.61 All kings, princes, etc., must be obeyed in religious matters “as the deacons of God.” 62 “Let a virgin be pure as the temple of God, as the house of Christ, as the lodging place of the Holy Ghost.” 63

“Let the widows and orphans be the

equivalent of the altar and the virgins of the censers.” 64 If God made Moses a god to Pharaoh with Aaron as his prophet, says the

Apostolic Constitutions in speaking of the higher offices of the church, “why should not you think of the mediators of your doctrine as prophets, and reverence them as gods? As

the bishop represents Moses, so the deacon

does Aaron … as Christ does nothing

without the Father, so the deacon does

nothing without the bishop … as the Son is

the messenger and prophet of the Father,

even so the deacon is also the messenger and prophet of the bishop.” 65 The deacon must not even give to the poor without first asking permission of the bishop, for were not Aaron and Miriam rebuked for acting without

consulting Moses? “Let the good bishop be

honored, loved, and feared as a Lord, as a

master, as a high priest of God, as a teacher of piety. For who hearkens to him, hearkens

to Christ. ”66 “Follow ye all the bishop as Jesus Christ,” says Ignatius, “and follow the presbyterium as the apostles.” 67 “We must look upon the bishop as upon the Lord

himself. ”68 “As our Lord never did anything without the Father, neither by his own

authority nor through the apostles, so may

you do nothing without the bishop nor try to be justified of yourselves.” 69 Quoting Psalm 81:6: “Ye are Gods, and all sons of the Most High,” the Apostolic Constitutions explains:

“the bishop presides over you as being

honored by the esteem [judgment] of God, by

which he rules the clergy and leads all the

people. And the deacon stands by and

supports him as Christ does the Father. …

For the deaconess is to be honored by you as the type of the Holy Ghost… . And as no one

can believe in Christ without the Holy Ghost, so no woman may approach a deacon of a

bishop except through a deaconess. And the

presbyters [priests] are to you the type of the apostles” whom Christ sent through the

world to teach the gospel. 70 “I am one with the bishop, the presbytery, and the deacons,”

says Ignatius. “With them I shall have my

share in God.” 71 “The presbyters are the true successors of the apostles,” he explains. 72

“Give heed to the bishop that God may give

heed to you.” 73

Here we have equivalents—but not in

absolute kind or degree, but only in relative authority to each other. Would anyone

maintain that the deacon is Christ on earth?

He is merely like Christ for the sake of

illustration in one respect. The presbyters

are not apostles or successors to apostles;

they are compared to a sanhedrin, a body

assisting the Lord in his work. Deacons are

compared, for example, to Christ, Aaron, the Holy Ghost, the apostles, and bishops. All

are engaged in the same sacred calling, all

hold offices of varying degree; but the fact that the work is all for the same purpose, that all priesthood functions at certain clearly

marked levels, and that these levels

resemble each other does not mean that these offices are all the same. It is necessary to insist upon this, since the claim that the

bishop continues the apostolic office rests

precisely on this argument of equivalence.

Thus Batiffol notes that the church “is not a society in which all are equal, but one in

which a divinely instituted power is

perpetuated, some being invested with it to

sanctify, teach, govern the other. The

bishops, successors of the apostles, are thus not an office of ministry bestowed upon them by the faithful, but a potestas of divine right.

Such is the principle of the hierarchy.” 74 But aside from the fact that the perpetuation of the offices without the potestas is just what Tertullian objected to in the church of the

third century, 75 Batiffol assumes that the mere statement of the proposition proves it: there was a hierarchy, and so it happens that bishops succeed apostles.

Higher priesthood of apostles. According to a letter attributed to Anacletus, there are two types of priesthood: (1) the Lord sent the apostles into the various provinces, but when their converts became too numerous to

handle, (2) he then sent out the seventy-two disciples. “Now the bishops occupy the

place of the Lord’s apostles, while the

presbyters occupy that of the seventy-two

disciples.” 76 They “hold the places [ locum tenent]” once held by these, but it does not follow that their priesthood or authority is identical, but only that those earlier officers had been replaced by another kind. Note that Anacletus is here trying to explain how

presbyter and bishop should have identical

functions—the seventy-two simply took over

the work of the apostles. But if the seventy-two were the true successors of the apostles, then the bishops must have succeeded them,

and the presbyters, the followers of the

seventy-two, must thereby be also the

successors of the apostles. It is a very

confusing attempt to explain something. After all, Ignatius did say just that. It was long maintained by many that episcopus and presbyterus held one and the same office, and the theory was that the president of the college of presbyters gradually became the

bishop of the entire local church.77 Hatch points out that in the earliest churches only the bishop and deacons are mentioned, never

the presbyters, indicating that the title of presbyter “had been for the time being

shoved aside.” 78 The reason for this, Hatch believed, was that the bishops and deacons

were strictly functionaries, while the

presbyters had more of a spiritual office but

no part at all in Kultus: “They probably had no more than the place which the Jewish

presbyters had in the synagogue—seats of

honour and dignity, but no official part in the service. ”79 Harnack seconded this episcopal-deaconal versus presbyterial

distinction. 80 In the 1880s it was fashionable to believe that the episcopate and

presbyterial offices were identical.

Confusion of offices seems to be the rule,

and nothing is easier than to designate any

office bestowed by an apostle as

“apostolic.”

The discovery of the Didache in 1875 led Harnack to announce a realization which

“was in opposition to everything that had

ever been claimed before”—namely, that the

primitive church was endowed not with one

organization but with two. 81 Harnack pointed out what has since been universally accepted

—the presence in the earliest church of

traveling authorities, an institution of great significance for the study of the existence of an original centralized church organization.

These traveling agents, he noted, were not

elected but were appointed to their office by

“a mandate from God”; they were the

apostles, prophets, and teachers, and they

had, Harnack concluded, no administrative

or judicial function. 82 The bishops and deacons, on the other hand, had such

functions, but they were exercised only in the local branches. 83 Having determined that administration was important in the early

church and that authorities were also

important, Harnack left unanswered the

question, Who would administer the whole

church? It was the apostles, of course, but

Harnack remained under the spell of Sohm’s

thesis that one could not function in a

practical or regular way and still exercise

spiritual powers. 84 That the Spirit is not

directed or controlled does not mean that it cannot itself direct and control—that, we are told, is its specific function: the function of the Holy Ghost is to lead and direct in all

things and not merely to give a vague

emotional surge. If they operated wholly “in the Spirit,” that is all the more reason for thinking the apostles were engaged in

guiding and directing the affairs of the church among which they constantly traveled and

not reason for denying them any official

function at all. What we find in the Didache is, according to Harnack, “on the one side …

the central ecclesiastical organization of

those inspired teachers under the direction of the spirit, and on the other side the local

organizations with their administrative

officers.” This is “the double organization of the primitive church. ”85 It was soon pointed out that apostles also had function, while

bishops, presbyters, and deacons were also

expected to be full of the spirit; in other words, the division of church leadership

positions into spiritual and nonspiritual

offices was not valid. But this in no way

challenges the existence of the double

priesthood.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day

Saints, claiming to have “the same

organization that existed in the primitive

church” (Article of Faith 6), has two

priesthoods. One functions locally and the

other administers the church as a whole; both are purely spiritual and there has never been any conflict between them. As in Harnack’s

system, “the basis of the entire system is the duality of the general church and the

individual branches.” 86 The latter, as we have noted, are organized on lines exactly

similar to those of the church as a whole. So it was anciently, and that accounts for the

ease with which the offices later became

“identified” and also accounts for the possibility of claiming that the bishop was a successor to the apostle who ordained him—

though the apostle might well outlive the

bishop, and it was very common for bishops

to hold their place only temporarily.

Clement’s first epistle does not say that a

bishop is elected for life, even on good

behavior, though the question asked had been exactly that. On the other hand, no one doubts that an apostle holds his office for life.

Unique apostolic gift. Though all officers of the church should be inspired, the great

endowment of leadership is the prophetic

gift. That was the great principle that set the Christians off from other religions. Justin

Martyr, in defiance of modern Catholic

teaching, says,

Neither by nature nor by human intelligence

is it possible for men to know great and

divine matters, but by the gift that descends

from above upon holy men, who do not need the learned arts, neither skills in

controversy and debate, but rather to resign themselves to the power of the Holy Spirit,

which if they are in tune will come down

like a divine plectrum from heaven and play

upon them as upon instruments, making use

of righteous men and revealing to them the

divine and heavenly gnosis. 87

These men, unlike the philosophers, all tell the same story and all agree among

themselves. Herein Christian leadership

differed from that of other churches—it was

led by prophets under direct, divine

inspiration, whose wisdom was not the fruits of philosophy or training. In accusing the

church of having lost the power while

retaining the forms of godliness, Tertullian makes a sharp distinction between two

clearly marked levels of religious operation: both are good and necessary, but the higher

one has departed from the church. The higher

type is apostolic and prophetic and its genius is power— potestas. Against this the present church, according to Tertullian, can only set up a succession of bishops with discipline,

officium, in the place of potestas. 88 The old church had imperium—the authority to initiate organization, doctrine, etc.—while

the new one had instead ministerium—a prescribed routine. The temple was the

center of the old church, the synagogue the

model of the new; the Spirit was the highest guide in the former, the scripture in the latter; enthusiasmus was the guiding principle of interpretation then, allegory now; revelation was the source of doctrine then, reason now; the gnosis, tongues, and prophecy have

ceased as predicted, and in their place are

left only faith, love, and hope; the high priest has departed, the bishop is in his place; the Holy Ghost has become an intellectual

exercise; inspiration has yielded to tradition,

oracles to councils. “To James the Just and to John and Peter, the Lord gave the gnosis

after his resurrection,” says Clement. “They gave it further to the other apostles, and the rest of the apostles in turn gave it to the

seventy,” but there is no account of its ever being passed on any further.89 Why was it not handed to the bishops if they were to carry

on the work?—that is what one would

logically expect, as Irenaeus observed. 90 But could a bishop succeed an apostle?

When Bishops Became the Highest

Officers in the Church

When it came about that the highest office

in all the church was that of bishop, it was an absolute necessity to make the office the

equivalent of the apostolate in order to avoid facing the terrible alternative of admitting that the apostolic power—the whole stay and

support of the Church of Christ—had been

withdrawn. If it had not been withdrawn, someone, of course, would have to have it,

and who could that be but the one in highest authority, the bishop. Faced with this clear and desperate alternative, many simply said

the bishops were the successors of the

apostles and found there an end—this had to

be because if they were not, the alternative was too dreadful to think of. Such is

Batiffol’s attitude. “The deacons should

remember,” wrote Cyprian, “that the

apostles, that is to say, the bishops and those in charge, were chosen by the Lord, while

the deacons were appointed by the apostles

for themselves after the ascension of the

Lord into heaven as ministers of the

episcopate and that of the church.” 91 This admission that the deacons, though ordained

by apostles and therefore “apostolic,” were

actually of a lower order is significant.

According to Clement of Alexandria, “The

apostle Clement wrote the letter to the Corinthians.” 92 A note to this says that

“apostolic men were sometimes called

apostles by the ancient fathers.” 93 This is a clear recognition on their part that the

leaders of the church should be apostles,

though they never come anywhere near

proving that they were such. The normal

“succession of the faith” among the fourth-

century polemicists was patriarchs,

prophets, apostles, and martyrs—none

elective offices, as that of bishop always

was. They are another sort of thing, the

bearers of direct powers from the other

world. If the apostles had departed, so had

the prophets, and so the bishop naturally

falls heir to their honor: “The bishops are the mouth of God,” says the Apostolic

Constitutions.94 There are no more visitations of angels, so there is no other

solution but that the bishop himself be God’s

second gift to the church—namely, the visitation of angels. A writing contemporary with this statement insists that the bishops are not merely successors to the apostles, but that they are apostles since they have

inherited the power of baptizing and

anointing. The great spiritual gifts of the

ancients have also descended upon the

bishops, with the power of loosening and

binding that goes with them. Since the

seventy were commonly regarded as taking

over in place of the apostles, Hippolytus

lists the names of “the seventy apostles. ”95

Though no proof is offered, this is a

significant admission of a thing of which the fathers were well aware—that only an

apostle could be the successor of an apostle and that the divine gifts could not be

succeeded or replaced by anything—if they

were to be handed down, it could only be the gifts themselves and not a substitute for them.

Local authority only. Bishops were not appointed or prepared to administer the

affairs of the whole church since they were

strictly local officers. We have noted

Duchesne’s perplexity at the absence of any

machinery in Rome for the management of

anything more than the local church there: the bishop of Rome was not set up to be a

general authority. 96 “Follow ye all the bishop as Jesus Christ follows the Father,”

wrote Ignatius, “and follow the presbyterium as the apostles… . Wherever the bishop

appears, there is the congregation, just as

wherever Jesus Christ appears, there is the

general [catholic] church.” 97 The bishop is to the local church as no living officer is to the whole church. No one knows better than

Ignatius that the general authorities have

passed away—only Jesus Christ now

presides over the whole church. “Shall I,”

writes the third bishop of Antioch after

Peter, the head of the largest and, next to Jerusalem alone, the oldest church in

Christendom, “reach such a pitch of

presumption … as to issue orders to you as

if I were an apostle?” 98 Plainly being

“apostolic” did not give him the authority of an apostle.

“It is impossible to dispute,” wrote Jean

Reville, “that the episcopate as represented in the Epistles of Ignatius is essentially a local function, the authority of which is

limited to the community in which it was

exercised. Never does Ignatius appeal to his title of bishop of Antioch to give more

authority to his instructions.” 99 This is the more remarkable since the whole subject of

Ignatius’s letters is episcopal authority.

Certain churches are having trouble choosing and sustaining bishops, and Ignatius,

appalled by the wild disorder and vicious

atmosphere he finds in the churches

everywhere, takes it upon himself to correct them. “Here we have a series of letters

which are distinguished before all else by

the ardor with which their author pleads the cause of the episcopate, demanding absolute

submission of the faithful to their bishops: and the two main arguments, the two columns

on which the very concept of the catholic

episcopate itself has reposed from the

beginning, do not appear! ”100 One of these columns is the axiom that the bishops were

general authorities in the church, as they had to be if they were successors of the apostles.

Yet Ignatius, searching desperately for a

general authority to appeal to, finds none; he explicitly disclaims being one himself and

says he speaks not because anyone has

ordered or permitted him to, but simply

because his love will not let him hold his

peace. 101 “One cannot insist too much on this curious fact in the Ignatian literature … : the

complete absence of any allusion to the apostolic nature of the episcopate, and to any justification of the episcopal power by the

principle of apostolic succession.” 102 Could he have made such an appeal, Ignatius would

have had the solution to his problems. But he will not make it, though he is perfectly aware of what a treasure it would be if he could

only “give orders” like Peter and Paul:

“They were apostles,” he wrote to the

Romans. “I am but a man.” 103 Furthermore, Reville observes, “if the authority of the

bishops had really been as well established

as Ignatius wants it to be, it would not have been necessary to insist with such energy that people respect them. ”104 No one viewed them with awe as apostolic officers in the

end of the first century. Moreover there is in Ignatius “not yet the slightest trace of those conferences at which the bishops concerted,

as in the second half of the second century.

The bishop … not only does not yet have a sacerdotal character, but he does not even

have the character of a general authority.” 105

Bishops are not apostles. Exactly like Ignatius, Polycarp, writing to the churches, must confess that he is in no wise to be

considered on a par with the apostles: “For

neither I, nor any other such one, can come

up to the wisdom of the blessed and glorious Paul. He, when among you, accurately and

steadfastly taught the word of truth in the

absence of those who were then alive. And

when absent from you, he wrote you a letter

… which will build you up in that faith

which has been given you.” 106 Now this was written to the Philippians, and by all counts the letter to Philippi to which he refers is the weakest thing in the whole Bible—yet the

most influential bishop of his day in the

entire church, the man whose presence in

Rome to settle the Easter controversy107 was

for Irenaeus the surest claim that that church had no apostolic guidance, thinks of his own authority as being infinitely below that of a brief and not very informative letter from a real apostle.

In pleading for episcopal authority,

Clement preserves the same remarkable

silence as Ignatius: he fails to mention any office of his own, to give any direct orders (he is much more apologetic than Ignatius in this), or to appeal to apostolicity in the

office of the bishop, which might make the

latter sacrosanct. He merely ventures as an

opinion, and only because that opinion has

been asked for, that there is nothing in the scriptures which says evil men should

depose good, and so there is no reason for

deposing a good bishop. But he is

completely silent as to any principle of

tenure, such as we find in the holy office of the apostles. “Christ came from God,” writes

Clement, “and the apostles from Christ.” We wait for the next step, but it is not

forthcoming. Clement, like Ignatius,

resolutely refuses to say what in later ages would be so obvious as to be mechanical:

“and the bishops from the apostles.” 108

Instead, he makes a statement later that the apostles set up the bishops after the old

Jewish pattern, and knowing that there would be trouble about this office of bishop, they passed an epinome (i.e., a bylaw or special order) arranging for worthy men to take over and worthy successors to follow—that is

all109 The epinome puts everything on a level far below that of a general authority.

Consider here that all along the bishops

and apostles existed side by side as

contemporaries; we never hear of bishops

traveling with apostles to be trained up as

their successors, for the activities of the two were totally different. Very early orders

penalize a bishop for leaving his city; a bishop could not travel, and an apostle, as an emissary, had to travel. 110 The fact that the two offices existed as full-time functions

side by side for many years without overlap

shows that each was doing its own work.

Was the strenuous work of an apostle added

to that of a bishop when the apostles fell

asleep? “The apostles were a type,

preserving the image of an archetype,” says

Chrysostom, but he does not carry it on to the bishops. 111 Since the bishops are shepherds and Christ is the Archshepherd, says the

Catholic Schermann, their offices are

analogous112—but so are they analogous with the kings of the East who often called

themselves shepherds, and for that matter

had the functions of real shepherds. Analogy is not enough, even if it has scriptural

justification.

“All who were ordained to any office by

the laying on of hands of an apostle formed the episkope [the body of overseers],” says Schermann, “and could therefore have the

name of bishop.” 113 “As long as the apostles lived, … they personally performed the

liturgical functions, founded Christian

congregations, and set apart presbyters, who carried on their official functions there… .

These local liturgists and officiants of the local churches were also called, according

to their office, episkopoi. ”114 This is the common and understandable but typically

myopic view that an apostle could not ordain anyone to any office at all without giving him thereby apostolic authority!

Irenaeus makes much of the fact that the

bishops were “instituted by the apostles in

the various churches, where their successors have come down to our time.” 115 Like the passage in Clement, this makes it clear that when successors are first mentioned they are

not stated to be successors of the apostles, but only officials installed by apostles. “The tradition,” says Irenaeus, “has been handed

down from the apostles and preserved in the

churches by successions of presbyters.” 116

Tertullian, the greatest authority of the third century on the nature and institutions of the primitive church, was impatient with this

loose equating of everything that came from

the apostles with a full grant of apostolic

power. The keys and the promise were given

to Peter, he says, but to Peter only; there is not a word said to indicate that they were at a later date to be transferred to someone

else. What good are your “successions? ”117

he asks: the real church is “the Spirit

working through an inspired [ spiritalem]

man; the church is not a succession of

bishops.” 118

Yet so important was it to tie up Peter

somehow with the office of bishop that at an

early date the attempt was producing a rich outpouring of contradictions and absurdities.

We have seen the preposterous results of

trying to make Peter both an active apostle

and the bishop of Rome. Some people

believe, says Chrysostom, that there must

have been two Peters! The Gospel of the

Twelve Apostles simply has Christ ordain Peter an archbishop, though such an office

did not exist before the fourth century. 119 But what else could you do? According to the

Apostolic Constitutions, when the church was being formally organized, Peter

suggested first of all ordaining a bishop in the presence of all the apostles, including

Paul and James, bishop of Jerusalem—

pouring all their united authority into one

vessel, and then doing homage to him. 120

Absurd it may sound, but is it not what the

later Christian claim amounts to?

Seeing James as the Presiding Bishop of the Church

The mention of James the brother of the

Lord—whose title Catholic writers usually

put in quotation marks, controlling the texts to conform to their theories rather than

correcting those theories by the texts—

reminds us of the unique and important

position he held in the church. Here was a

bishop who was actually a general authority.

How does one account for that? According

to the most respected authorities, one does

not—James was a freak, a mistake, a flash in the pan. After all, he had no successors, did he, in his strange and exalted office? But

then, neither did the apostles. How strange

that all the general authorities should simply disappear—not only the traveling ones, but

the sedentary ones as well. One of the

earliest church writers, Hegesippus, quoted

by Eusebius in Historia Ecclesiastica 2.23,

says, “The brother of the Lord, James, took over the church along with [μετά + genitive]

the apostles,” 121 which is true, since he was strictly contemporary with the apostles and

did not succeed them but was killed before

any of them. Yet Jerome translates this

passage: “suscepit ecclesiam

Hierosolymorum post [μετά + accusative]

apostolos frater Domini Jacobus” 122—

which totally changes James’s position,

making him a successor to the apostles,

whom he did not succeed at all. Yet such

violence is necessary if we are to establish an apostolic succession through bishops.

Eusebius, seriously afflicted by doubts and

misgivings as a result of his experiences at Nicaea, set himself to establishing official ties between his own church and the

apostles. He did it, as Irenaeus had, by

tracing lines of bishops. All Irenaeus wanted in his arguments with the heretics was to

establish proof that certain doctrines went back to the apostles, so Eusebius is able to announce at the outset of his study: “I have not found until now a single writer on

ecclesiastical affairs who has concerned

himself with this question” of episcopal

succession. 123 Setting about “to record the lines of succession of the holy apostles …

and those who led and presided in the most

conspicuous positions in the church” 124—

i.e., looking for some succession to the

apostles not in any particular office but

assuming, for the sake of argument, that any important function in the church must be

apostolic if it can be traced to an apostle as the “instigator”—Eusebius reviews the

bishops lists of Jerusalem, Rome, Antioch,

and Alexandria. These are mere samplings,

chosen, he tells us, because of their relative importance, but only a few among many.125

In exactly this sense Irenaeus cites Rome as

one of many examples—a good example to use, he explains, because of its outstanding antiquity and leadership, but by no means the only one.126 Addressing himself to his task, Eusebius quickly discovers that the

documents are totally inadequate even in

those great churches to prove direct

derivation of office from the apostles: the

beginnings of these churches, he finds, are a complete mystery. As to the apostles, they

are like men standing on the other side of a huge gulf, from whom we catch only a few

faint syllables, vague, incoherent—snatched

away by the wind.127 What a powerful and significant image! It reminds one of

Polycarp’s equally grave and significant

pronouncement: “In Asia the great lights

went out.” 128

In the sixth book of Clement’s lost

Institutions, a work on the organization of the church, Eusebius found the famous

announcement that Peter, James, and John did not dispute for first place, but made James

the Just bishop of Jerusalem without

debate. 129 Of what “first place” is he speaking? Can there possibly have been any

such dispute or question among the three as

to the presidency of the church? Of course

not—the Lord had already settled that long

before. There is no mention here of their

disputing among themselves for any first

place: “Peter and James and John, after the

ascension of the Savior, as those set at the head by the Savior, did not set themselves to establishing their relative degrees of

authority, but chose James the Just to be

bishop of Jerusalem. ”130 Here we are told that they were already the presidency and

acted unitedly as such. They did not appoint James the Just to take over their office or be their successor—they all outlived him. Yet

that is the absurd interpretation that is put on

the passage to make it seem that a bishop is a successor to apostles. James, having

received a high office, was still not

president of the church—Peter, James, and

John were. Here we have two supreme

offices coexisting. How is that possible?

Very easily—James was the presiding

bishop of the church, not its president, for that was Peter.

Consider the history of the early church,

writes Chrysostom, how “James the brother

of the Lord was at that time overseer of

[έπεσκόπευεν, oversaw] the church at

Jerusalem in the beginning, and also

presided over all the other faithful Jews.

When Jews in Antioch also started to

believe, because of the long distance from

Jerusalem and the fact that some Gentiles

there were also believing, Peter went and

lived among them as a member of their race

[ ethnikos].” 131 This is an attempt to explain

how there could be two heads of the church, but Chrysostom cannot claim what would

appear to be a simple and logical

explanation, that James presided over the

Jewish element in the church while Peter

took care of the Gentiles, for that was simply not so, Peter himself “representing the

Jewish element.” Chrysostom himself gives

us the clue to the answer when he describes

James’s functions as those of a bishop—but

a presiding bishop, indeed, one who “looked

after the affairs” not only of his city, but of all of them. He was, as is well known, not a traveling authority like the apostles and not a missionary. He “held the fort,” so to speak, in Jerusalem and managed the general

offices. To him the apostles sent in written reports. To him, as a bishop, Clement must

report his doings and his pseudoclaims to the presidency; at general conferences it was

James who acted as master of ceremonies, as

it was James who kept the records—all for the sake of order and regularity.

Since this office of presiding bishop of the church disappeared as completely as that of

apostle and of the first presidency, it is not surprising that students of succeeding ages

have all been perplexed by it and thought it a freak, a mistake, a fifth wheel—with Peter,

James, and John alive and well, why should

they choose yet another chief in the church?

Not to supplant them certainly—the nature of the work for which the Master had chosen

them from the beginning had not changed and

they had no intention of turning over that

work to another—but to preside along with

them over the lower priesthood.

We have seen that the discovery of two

priesthoods in the ancient church came as a

complete surprise when it was announced in

the mid-1880s. The implications of the

discovery have not yet been fully realized

since it requires a complete readjustment of our whole concept of the organization of the early church, an adjustment which

established churches are, of course,

extremely reluctant to make. But once that

necessary readjustment is made in the light

of the discoveries of recent years, the office of James at last makes perfectly good sense.

He presided over the lower priesthood—the

priesthood of Aaron.

The Bishop as an Office in the Lower

Priesthood

After his resurrection, according to one of

the oldest fragments, Christ gave something

very special, something the Jews did not

have, to Peter, James, and John, and they in turn transmitted it to the rest of the apostles, who transmitted it to the seventy132—but there is no mention of its getting any further than that. Where do the bishops come in?

Their office was not something brought to earth first by the Lord—the Jews already had it as literal descendants of Aaron. The oldest mention of the episcopal offices states

explicitly that this was no new thing but was had among the Jews: “The apostles have

preached the gospel to us by command of the

Lord Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ by command

of God. Christ was therefore sent forth by

God, and the apostles from Christ. ”133 At this point one naturally expects the next link in the chain, for some claim that this letter is being written by the bishop of Rome

specifically to assert his primacy in the rule of the church—somehow he forgets to

mention this, the whole point of his letter, and goes on, without mentioning any central

directive office in the church. “Preaching

through the countries and cities, they

appointed the firstfruits, having tested them in the spirit, to be the episkopoi and helpers

[ diakonoi] of those who should later believe.” 134 Nothing at all is said about there being apostles in office or function or in

directing the affairs of the church—they are the local overseers to stay on the spot and

take general charge. “There was nothing new

in that,” Clement continues. “From of old it had been written of bishops and deacons, for somewhere the scripture saith: I shall

establish their bishops [LXX episkopoi, pequadathek] in righteousness and their deacons [LXX diakonoi, nogeshek] in faith

[Isaiah 60:17].” 135 This shows that the episcopal office is a continuation of a

Jewish institution, and there is much to bear that proposition out.

The upstart sects that claimed to preserve

the primitive church intact and attempted

without authorization to reproduce its

powers, gifts, and offices did not fail to note that the office of bishop could not be the

highest office in the true church—and the great and learned Tertullian was convinced

of that also,136 to the point of joining one of those sects. One of their most powerful

arguments against the main church was that it no longer had any offices higher than bishop.

“Among us,” wrote Jerome, “the bishops

hold the place of the apostles, but they put the bishop in third place.” 137 Yet Jerome recognized their doctrines and practices as

thoroughly orthodox save on that one point—

they insist on prophecy and recognize

spiritual offices higher than those of a

bishop. 138 Some of those revivalist groups went so far in imitating the early church as to have twelve apostles. Such bold but

unauthorized claims met everywhere with

enthusiastic reception, indicating a general awareness that something was lacking in the

main church. This feeling of loss and

dissatisfaction expressed itself in many

ways.

When the historical approach to the

problem of the organization of the early

church supplanted the conventional dogmatic

approach in the 1880s, it became apparent,

says Linton, “that the episcopate is not a

continuation of the apostolate,” 139 and this led to all sorts of theorizing and speculation.

Though the theories have changed through the centuries, the basic premise remains

unshaken. While it is obvious enough that the apostles appointed bishops and presbyters,

Lake observed—and who would doubt it?

—“it is not less clear that the functions of an apostle were quite different from those of a presbyter or bishop, and that functionally the apostle is akin to the prophet, not to the

presbyter.” 140 This is proven, Lake points out, by the Didache.141 Strange that one of the most celebrated and devout scholars of

the day could have announced as late as

1911 as a notable contribution to knowledge a thing that the Latter-day Saints had known for generations: that the functions of bishops and priests are quite different from those of prophets and apostles, and the fact that the former were ordained to their offices by the latter does not make their office “apostolic.”

“If we ask who were the most important

people in the Christian church in the first

generation,” Lake writes further, “the answer undoubtedly is, the Apostles and Prophets. If we go on farther, and ask who was the most

important person in the church at Rome at the end of the second century [not, observe, in

the whole church], the answer

unquestionably is that it was the Bishop. But the difficulty comes when we inquire how

this change took place; for that is precisely the problem to which no undoubted or

unquestionable answer can be given.” 142

The great Eduard Schwartz designates the

theory of the “monarchical episcopate as bearer of the apostolic succession” as a

“legal fiction,” the true nature of which is apparent in many things. 143 In the earliest church, says Theodor Brandt in a recent

study, “ ‘Apostolic’ and ‘Diakonat’ had as

yet nothing to do with the official degrees of the later hierarchy,” which were another

thing entirely. 144 “The bishops recognized the superior authority of the apostles,” wrote the Catholic Duchesne, “… [as] founders

and spiritual masters … of all the Christian societies in general,”—i.e., over against the bishops he sets their superiors—the general

authorities. “As these great leaders

disappear,” Duchesne continues, “one sees

appearing a definitive hierarchy,” in other

words, the local organization of bishop,

priest, and deacon.145 This is the old Jewish system, he says, which was already on the

ground and is a natural hierarchy for any

such organization to fall into.146 But these offices do not appear to take over in place of the general authorities—they had been there

all along doing a full-time job with no

thought of qualifying for apostolic functions.

How can Duchesne say they appear when

they were there already? Because he must

say it if there are to be any successors to the apostles. But who says there have to be?

What Duchesne should have been able to

write, had the church continued and had the

apostasy not come, as they themselves

announce, is: “As these leaders disappear,

other such leaders took their place as

happened anciently with the election of

Matthew.” But instead, all he can point to is that when the great lights went out there were lesser lights still shining—but that has been the case in every dispensation of the gospel.

As we have seen, even among this lower

priesthood there was the greatest confusion

when the apostles departed, as the writings of all the apostolic fathers attest. We have noted the inextricable confusion of the office of presbyter with that of bishop to the degree that many scholars have thought the two

offices to be one and the same. In

Alexandria, one of the very oldest Christian foundations, “all churches were under one

bishop, but each presbyter [priest] had his

own church in which to assemble his own

people.” 147 As late as A.D. 300 the Council of Elvira declares that “If a deacon who is

ruling [ regens] a congregation baptizes people without a bishop or a priest, the

bishop must pronounce a blessing over those

thus baptized to make it valid, though if he fails to do so and those baptized should die, they will not go to hell as if unbaptized. ”148

The bishop should be present at ordinances,

Ignatius wrote, so that everything may be

done “firmly and securely.” 149 Such

instances illustrate great vagueness and doubt on matters concerning the authority of the lower priesthood even when functioning

in its proper field. This complete confusion

—not only among the various claims and

theories tying the offices of bishop, priest, and deacon to those of apostle, prophet, and seventy, but also among the various officers of the local churches as to their office and authority, and finally among the bishops for a claim to be general authorities—can only

have come about if and when the lower

priesthood was also lost to men. After all,

James the Just and his mysterious office of

presiding bishop disappeared just as

completely and suddenly as did the apostles

—and none was left in his place. It is true

that thousands of public and religious

officials in the city of Jerusalem survived

him, but that does not mean that they

succeeded him.

Batiffol has stoutly argued the descent from the apostles of a single, unchanging,

unique episcopal authority. He grandly

announces that in the ancient church priests could not have cathedras: “The cathedra

[bishop’s chair, seat, “see”] is the exclusive insignium of the bishops—the symbol of his authority, the symbol of the unity of the

church.” 150 Yet Hugo Koch points to Constantine’s references to presbyters’

thrones in 314 and cites many ancient texts to show that priests as well as bishops have

chairs or thrones. 151 Duchesne discovered that for a long time there was only one

bishop in all of Gaul—the other churches

were governed by other officers. 152

Dependence on Jewish Sources for

Church Practices Relevant to the

Bishop

The famous dictum of Tertullian that the

church grew up “in the shadow of the synagogue” 153 is the point of departure for much discussion and investigation. It is the key to the understanding of conventional

Christianity. There is nothing mysterious in the survival and integrity of the local

branches after the passing of the apostles:

they had been organized around the

synagogues from the first. In the synagogue

they had a pattern both for local organization and for “spiritual Israel.” The word church itself, as has often been noted, is the

equivalent of the Hebrew qāhāl, the congregation of all Israel, of which the

meetings in the synagogue were merely a

scale-model reproduction. The synagogues

scattered throughout the world were a result of the Diaspora—they did not represent the

real assemblies of Israel, which had to take place at the temple in Jerusalem and had to

embrace the entire holy nation, but they were

merely regarded as temporary expedients. To this idea, Lietzmann attributes the singular practice of the early Christians of referring to their local churches as temporary

foundations on the earth: “The church of

God, which is temporarily visiting [ zu

Gaste] in Rome, greets the church of God, which is temporarily visiting in Corinth,”

which means, explains Lietzmann, “the

church is on this earth only as a temporary

guest—it is a stranger and a pilgrim. ”154

“The Christian church took from the Jews

two basic ideas,” according to Schwartz:

“(1) that of the people of God, and (2) that of the spiritual gifts.” The “people of God” are identical with the Christian idea of the

church: “From the very first beginnings the

gospel is preached and believed not by a

sum total of individuals, but by an organized community [ Gemeinschaft], originally constituted by the Resurrected One through

direct revelation, and later by the belief that the Spirit of the Lord continued to operate in its midst.” 155 This sort of thing, Schwartz believes, is part of an unbroken tradition

carried forth among the Jews, 156 though not by all the Jews. Official Jewry did not like it, but as we have seen there were at all

times numbers of ardent Jews who thought in

messianic terms and whose language was

that of the New Testament.

There has been much discussion as to

whether the apostolate was originally a

Jewish institution. In every age there have

been men “sent” from God—that is, apostles,

in the literal sense of the word; and by the very nature of their calling, they had to be prophets. The Twelve certainly come under

this category, though scholars have been

troubled because they were not exactly like

other prophets in all respects but were very special missionaries, special witnesses with

a special assignment. Should we look for fraud and imitation if they resemble the

ancient prophets in so many things? Of

course not. The Lord himself describes the

sending of prophets from time to time into

the vineyard, and among them he includes

himself—another one sent from the presence

of the Lord of the vineyard—but the fact that he places himself in the category along with other workers sent into the vineyard in no

wise precludes his describing himself as a

unique and special representative.

The finding of the Dead Sea Scrolls makes

us less and less surprised at the close

resemblance between the church Jesus

founded and the sort of thing that was to be found among faithful Jews of the time: the

one was the realization of what the others

merely anticipated. At all times the

churchmen had sought to establish ties

between the church and the prophets,

patriarchs, and apostles of old—and always they have had to fall back on sentimental

abstractions and allegorical extravagances.

This has been annoying and unsatisfying, and the fathers have not been able to leave the

mysteries of royal priesthood and

Melchizedek alone. “The church receives

royal power from Christ in two ways,”

according to Epiphanius, who is typical in

his speculation: “Through David, who was

an eternal divine king—it receives the

priestly power through him directly as high

priest.” And how does the church get it?

“Through the ordination of James, called the brother of the Lord and apostle, the first

bishop and a natural son of Joseph, and

consequently a legitimate brother of the

Lord… . This James was of the line of

David; he was a Jewish high priest, and

Eusebius tells us much about him.” 157 Long out of touch with ancient sources and even

traditions, Ephraim is trying to make out a case, and he is hopelessly confused: he is

typical.

The once-popular Hellenistic theory of the

independent origin of the liturgy,

organization, and missionaries of the

separate Christian churches has now been

left behind in favor of viewing “the

organization of the primitive church as an

extension of the pattern of salvation laid

down in the Old Testament.” 158 The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Damascus fragment have

borne out this viewpoint. In a study of these, J. L. Teicher has recently suggested a

reconstruction of events:

After the martyrdom of James in 67 and

shortly before the fall of Jerusalem in 70

c.e., the leaders of the Hebrew Christians in Jerusalem received by divine revelation a

warning of the imminent catastrophe and

escaped to Pella. Soon after the fall of the city an electoral assembly, composed of the

desposynoi [Jesus’ blood relations] and apostles and disciples of Jesus, met in Pella and chose a successor to James, Symeon

son of Clopas and cousin of Jesus… .

Symeon’s election was contested and his

success in face of the stronger rights of

Jesus’ closer relative—since it is generally agreed that the rule in the early church was

“monarchical”—must be regarded as the …

sign of victory of the Pauline trend in the

Church… . The secession of the Hebrew

Christians from the Church began after the

election of Symeon. 159

These Jewish Christians, Teicher suggests,

“organised themselves as a separate Jewish

Christian sect in the Syrian desert, probably adopting as a model … certain Essene

institutions.” The leaders of this movement

were “sons or grandsons of Jude.” 160 On the other hand, Ethelbert Stauffer says that

Simeon (Symeon) was chosen as “the only

living relative of the Lord who had seen

Christ in a special revelation” and thus breaks down Teicher’s threadbare

explanation of all oddities and discrepancies in the ancient church by appeal to “Pauline

Christianity.” 161 Stauffer notes that a successor to James was actually ordained

and that the whole thing was done on the

ancient Jewish pattern. 162 In the roll discovered at Jericho he finds the title of

bishop as an official Jewish religious

office. 163 The word didache is also found in pre-Christian use with exactly the meaning it later had in the church, as is the word

paroikia, “sojourn,” which was used to describe the temporary nature of the local

religious communities. Thus new words are

being added to the already large vocabulary

of standard terms that are characteristically Christian, yet have their origin among the

local communities of the Jewish Diaspora.

Stauffer emphasized that James was the

most important man in Jerusalem in A.D. 62

and that Simeon had that distinction after

James’s martyrdom. 164 But he does not offer a word as to either running any kind of

competition to the apostles, even though by

all later calculations the apostles must

certainly have bestowed their office on

James when they made him presiding bishop.

Between bishop and apostle there is plainly

no overlapping, no confusion. Stauffer notes in all the earliest records of episcopal

succession the operation of the old Jewish

laws and customs, which allowed the whole

thing to be kept as much as possible within a family. The Jews, he notes, kept careful

genealogies and followed “the high-priestly

rule of succession,” which meant that all

their priesthood should be traced back to

Aaron. This is the rule for bishops, Stauffer tells us, and it is in marked contrast to the succession of apostles—special witnesses

chosen by the Lord himself. 165

This close tie-in of the office of bishop

with the office and blood of Aaron was a

permanent heritage in the church—vague and

confused as the traditions all became, it

nevertheless keeps turning up in every age.

“Everyone must confine himself to his own

office,” says the 127 Canons of the

Apostles, a work discovered in the early twentieth century, in a passage complaining

that the office of high priest is not being

taken seriously in the church:

Those who make up their own rules are

opposing Christ, the Bishop of All

Creatures, the Son of God the Great High

Priest Jesus. By Moses were established the

high priests, priests, and Levites; by the

Saviour were established the Twelve

Apostles and by the apostles we, Clement

and James, were instituted, along with

others too numerous to mention. Christ is

the first true, only sovereign, priest; after his

ascension we established the bishops, priests, and deacons to the number of

seven. 166

All the Clementine writings, those closest

to Peter, see in the Old Testament the norms and patterns for the offices of bishop and

below. According to the Apostolic

Constitutions, a bishop should hear charges, judge crimes, and assign penalties following the Jewish pattern. 167 Those who preside in the churches should be supported financially by the membership “as the priests, Levites,

presidents, and officiants of God, as

prescribed in Numbers 18:1–8… .

Formerly,” this passage notes, “the

congregation [ laos, laity] were called the people of God and a holy nation.” 168 They are no longer called that, but nonetheless the catholic church is now the people of the

Decalogue, the chosen people, etc. 169 “[The bishops] are now your high priests, and your

priests are the elders; and your Levites are now deacons, and your readers, cantors, and

doorkeepers are your deaconesses and

widows and virgins and orphans.” 170 This seems rather confusing, but the thing to note is the strict adherence to the imitation of the Aaronic priesthood.

The Apostolic Constitutions continues: the Old Testament tabernacle is the church.

“Therefore you who are our bishops today

be to your people priests, Levites—of the

ark, of the holy catholic church, standing at the altar and bringing the intellectual and

bloodless sacrifices through Jesus the Great High Priest. Be ye prophets, princes,

leaders, kings, mediators between God and

the faithful, knowers of the scriptures, voices of God, witnesses of his will, bearing the

sins of all and answering for all.” 171 And to the people: “As the Jews could not offer

without Levites, so you may do nothing

without the bishop. Anything done without that office is void, as the doings of Saul

were without the approval of Samuel. Christ

without the Father cannot glorify himself… .

It is fitting for the bishop to bring the

sacrifice as the high priest, whether by

themselves or by the deacons.” 172

As to the ordination of a deaconess, “Let

the bishop anoint her head with oil, in the

manner in which the priests and kings of old were anointed.” 173 That, in view of the fact that the deaconess holds no office and no

authority at all! It is all a type and a pattern:

“The deacons must refer everything to the

bishop as Christ does to God; but such things as the deacons can manage themselves,

having received authority from the bishop, as the Lord did from the Father: public

administration and relief.” 174 All rules of marriage and sex life are cited from the

Jewish law.

The ordination prayer for bishops is significant: After an invocation following the Old Testament pattern comes the prayer:

“Give in thy name, O God who is known in

the heart, to this thy servant, whom I have

chosen for bishop that he may blamelessly

… care for the flock… . Give to him, all

ruling Lord, through thy Christ, the

participation in the Holy Spirit; that he may have authority to [bind and] loose …

according to the authority which thou gavest to thine apostles. ”175 A letter (falsely) attributed to Anacletus says that a bishop

must be anointed “after the [Old Testament]

example of the prophets and kings; … the

invisible virtue of the Holy Ghost is mixed

in the holy chrism. James the brother of the Lord was ordained bishop of Jerusalem by

Peter, James, and John at Jerusalem; thereby, as they bestowed ordinations upon his

successors with the approval of all others

present, similarly he was ordained a bishop… . It follows that those who hold the highest priesthood, i.e., bishops, are to be judged by God and not by men.” 176 “If the sons of Aaron represent the presbyters in

their office,” says this letter, “and Aaron

represents that of the high priest, that is, the bishop, then Moses indubitably stands for the figure of Christ; like Christ, he is a direct mediator between God and men, the true

leader of the people and the true head of the priesthood.” 177

Note here that the bishop is of Aaron,

while Moses, guiding the people as a

prophet by direct revelation, is something

higher. Anacletus here always calls the

office of bishop the highest priesthood,

because in his day it truly was. In the

Damascus Covenant there is in each camp an “inspector [ me∫aqqer]”: “He will love them as a father his children … as a

shepherd his flock.” Above them there is also “an inspector of all the camps”—the

bishop of bishops as it were. The bishops

must retire at sixty, the presiding bishop at fifty: “No officers for life!” 178 It has often been noted that the office of bishop has no

life tenure as the higher offices do. Even

Clement, when the problem was brought up,

could not point to any such rule for ancient bishops. As described in the Jewish New

Covenant, “here and there at the head of each community there is an overseer, the ‘bishop.’

And the ideal of both churches [Christian

and pre-Christian] is essentially that of unity, communion in love—even going so far as the

sharing of common property.” 179

“At first,” wrote Duchesne, “the local

ecclesiastical group was constituted and

organized on the model offered by the

Jewish communities.” 180 “Whether by imitation of the synagogues, or simply

through the dictated force of essential need in every community, the first Christians soon found themselves provided with a hierarchy

of three degrees. This hierarchy took its

powers, directly or indirectly, from the

apostles themselves, sometimes from the

local bishop and sometimes from the

superior ecclesiastical authority,

representing the succession of the

apostles. ”181 Here again is the unwarranted but necessary assumption that any officers

having their powers from the apostles must

represent a line of apostolic succession.

Duchesne can tell us absolutely nothing

about this “superior authority” through which the local churches’ officers received their

powers, save that it disappeared very early

and very completely. The apostolic fathers

all compare the local hierarchy with that of the main church and with that of Christ, the Father, and the apostles, but this is, as we

have seen, strictly analogy: sometimes an office is treated as the equivalent to that of the apostles; another time the holder of the same office is compared with Christ himself, or with the Holy Ghost, or with Moses, or

with Abraham, or with the high priest, or

with Aaron, or with God the Father, etc. It is all simply an analogy to illustrate not the

absolute powers of the relative offices of the priesthood, but their relative powers and the need of subordination one to another. If

Christ is subject to the Father, why should

not a deacon be subject to the bishop? A

powerful argument for order and proper

subordination—but with no thought of

making the deacon the equal to Christ or the bishop to the Father.

Duchesne surmises that in this Jewish

system, “nowhere does one find a local

religious center analogous to Jerusalem and

to its temple. This last fact, which so sharply

marked off the difference between Jews and Christians, was prompt, it is true, to

disappear” when the Christians lost their

central organization as the Jews had lost

theirs.182 This is a very important fact in understanding the nature and genius of the

Christian church, for it answers the question: What became of the ancient Christian

church? The same thing that became of the

Jewish church and priesthood—they were

taken away. The synagogue is not the temple; the rabbis are not the Levites; the ancient

rites and ordinances are not now being

practiced; the Jewish religion as set forth in the inspired books is today in abeyance. But that does not mean that nothing on earth

remains of it. Paul told the Corinthians that the greatest of all gifts, the gnosis, would be taken away, that prophecy, even to the

limited degree then enjoyed, would be

silenced, and that the gift of tongues would

be found no more. Does nothing remain then?

In their place, says Paul, will be left behind faith, hope, and love. And this is exactly

what faithful Jews retain of their old

religion: they live in hope, they live in faith, and they live in charity; they keep the

memory and the hope alive; if they do not

any more have the glories of the temple, they never cease to recall them; forbidden even to set foot in Jerusalem, they swore never to

forget what Jerusalem had been. Their

synagogues were local churches led by a

council of “elders”: “to every Jewish society belong the elders; even in the Hellenistic and Roman period they make the core of the

Synhedrion.” This seems to be the origin of

the Christian presbyteroi. 183

In the Apostolic Constitutions the prayer of John for the ordination for a presbyter

asks God to “fill him with the spirit of grace and counsel even as Moses was ordered to

choose assistants.” For the deaconess he prays, let her be as Miriam, Deborah, Anna,

and Huldah—all Old Testament

characters. 184 The presence of numerous offices in the early church having no specific standing or authority, which were all

dropped in various times and places, is a

heritage of a loosely controlled local

organization. The synagogues kept alive the

Jewish religion. They did not preserve the

ancient rites and ordinances nor the authority to perform them; they kept warm the memory

of other dispensations and above all kept

alive the hope of Israel. Thus, though

deprived of the glories of the temple and the priesthood, they nonetheless performed a

valuable service, religious and prophetic.

They are not a thing to be held in contempt.

So too with these Christian churches that

grew up “in the shadow of the synagogues.”

They were synagogues too. When the

apostolic authority was withdrawn, when the rites and ordinances were taken away, they

kept alive the memory of the Savior and the

apostles. By its own confession the unique

function of the Christian church is to

preserve without increase or diminution a

definite “deposit,” to hold it and keep it

warm while looking forward to the second

coming. This is precisely the function of the synagogue, and it deserves our honor and

respect. The synagogue was admittedly but a

feeble reflection of the religion of the Jews: scattered and uprooted communities kept the

flame burning.

How then should the new revelation

follow such a sad pattern unless it found

itself in a like case? Joseph Lechner, in the latest authoritative work on the Catholic

liturgy, finds its origin “before all in

Judaism, the liturgy of the synagogue. ”185 If the least be said for it, we find here closely

parallel institutions. Only if the Christians were as lost and deserted as the Jews would

they turn to them for the rites and practices of their worship. The Mass, of which Lechner

is speaking, owes more of its ritual and

liturgy to the rites of the synagogue than to any other source. The synagogue rites,

however, are not the rites of the temple, but of a people separated from and deprived of

all the ordinances and authority that had once been given their fathers from heaven. Now,

when the Christians must go to this sad

source for the entire substance of the liturgy, we can only assume that they too, as

Duchesne points out, lost all official ties

with their own divine origins and had to

carry on, as the Jews, in faith, hope, and

charity through the centuries. 186 The whole religious life of the Middle Ages, as we

shall see later, was a quest and a hope: a

search for something lost. The teachings and

ordinances of the apostles appear in the very earliest Christian sources as deep, dark

mysteries. But the ritual and liturgy carried out by the bishop, priest, and deacon can be examined in every stage of their

development—and Lechner has done that—

and found to be borrowings from human

institutions on every side. Lechner not only admits the fact but goes even further, making the best of an inescapable position by

exalting it to a principle: “If the above-

named pre- and non-Christian influences

have played the most evident role in shaping the cult practice of the church, they are by no means the only such influences, nor the last, and it is by no means out of the question that in the future still other cultural and ethnic zones shall contribute elements to our liturgy, displacing older forms, and that the cult of the church shall adapt itself to still other peoples and concepts as it already has to

those of the West.” 187 Since according to Catholic teaching, the raison d’être of the

priesthood is the performance of cult offices, it must be admitted that priesthood and cult are here seen to be hopelessly adrift in the world—anything like fast apostolic ties and

controls is out of the question in a church that has borrowed its rituals from the pagans

—“displacing older forms” and acquiring

new ones as desired. Batiffol rightly says,

speaking for his own church, “Ecclesiology

reaches its completion with the dogma of the pontifical primacy.” 188 In a church founded by the Lord there would be no science of

“ecclesiology” to study the development of

organizational dogma—for the organization

would be complete at the outset.

From the Dead Sea Scrolls we learn that

something very close to the office and title of bishop was had among the Jews in pre-Christian times. The historic background of

the episcopal office has never been completely explored. Once its pre-Christian

and Jewish background is recognized, many

doors are opened. The marked dependency

of the whole church order on that of the

synagogue makes the dependence of the

office of bishop on the Jewish models

unavoidable. We are referring to the

conventional office of bishop, however, not

to that office as it existed in apostolic times: for, like everything else in the church, the lower priesthood was lost as completely as

the higher. The apostles indeed founded

churches, but the bishops “stood in doubt of them” and regretted that they could only

handle their affairs properly when an apostle was at hand to instruct them; they noted that with the withdrawal of apostolic authority

the churches wilted like flowers cut from a

stock. 189 All is confusion and perplexity in the apostolic fathers. Not only did the

churches instantly begin disputing with each other in the absence of an apostolic authority to appeal to, but within each church factions arose putting forth rival candidates for

bishop. Such a state of things, the apostolic fathers warn again and again, can and, if it does not soon cease, most certainly will

destroy the church. But they also know that

without a head to turn to there is no hope of improving things, and they themselves,

insisting they have no such general authority, know of no one else to turn to. Only one

outcome was possible—the predicted one:

the famine for the word of the Lord.

The Jewish and Worldly Origins of

the Office and Title of Bishop

If the office of bishop in the later church

came directly from the apostles, it is very

strange, and a fact on which we cannot insist too emphatically, says Reville. Ignatius is

entirely unaware of the fact, 190 as is 1

Clement, and these two are the earliest writers after the apostles and are completely and intimately concerned with the problem

of establishing episcopal authority. Neither of them appeals to the apostolic nature of the episcopal office in pleading its importance

and dignity! It is plain that in their time it did not have that dignity. On the other hand there is no doubt at all that the apostles did

establish bishops. This must have been

another order entirely. Where then did the

bishops of the second period come from?

Nothing could be simpler: if the churches

were modeled after the synagogue, so

naturally would be their officers. The Jews

had had apostles, but the early church had

something very special: the Apostles, the Twelve. Every Jewish community had its

council of elders—the presbyters; but the

early Christians never for a moment

confused them with those they called “the elders,” that is, the elders of the apostles’

time, whose deeds and sayings reach us in

Irenaeus, Polycarp, Clement, and Eusebius

as traditions from a special order of beings the likes of which have completely

disappeared from the earth. In the later

Christian church the number of deacons in

every church was supposed to be exactly

seven (Acts 6), to represent in some way the Seventy, who had vanished and whose office

and calling was one of the mysteries.

The office of teacher is identified with that of reader. As such it was a part of every

synagogue, but the early fathers knew that a teacher in the primitive church was

something entirely different—just what, they could not say. In every synagogue one might

find officers bearing the names of bishop,

priest, teacher, and deacon. These names

were also employed in the early church but

in a very special sense. It was not this early sense, but the Jewish one, that the later

church preserved along with rites and

ordinances that were also not of the earliest times but much later acquisitions taken from many sources by a church that would never

have been under the painful necessity of

building up its rituals through the years had the original rites and practices, quite

sufficient for all purposes, not been

completely lost. The excuse (i.e., the

standard explanation) that more practical,

popular, and otherwise expedient procedures

had to be worked out to suit altered

circumstances is worthless since ritual is not a practical thing anyway. It is not adapted to the convenience of a society, but rather

requires of the society—any society—the

discipline of conformity to it.

Everything about the later episcopal office

betrays its Jewish and worldly origin. The

idea of a religious overseer in a community is very ancient, and very anciently that

function is “episcopal.” Thus Solon assures

his fellow Athenians at the beginning of the sixth century B.C. that God will never

destroy the city as long as it is watched over by Athena, episkopos.191 While the Egyptian god is hidden and secret, says Eduard

Meyer, the Greek god is episkopos because he oversees the land from his high castle

seat. This is a common Aryan concept—

prominent in Norse mythology—of

necessarily Asiatic origin: it belongs to the economy of the mountain palace, the super

lookout from which the ruler surveys all the deeds that are done in his domain and sends

out the arrows of his wrath to destroy those who think to escape his will. The concept is most at home among the Persians, whence

the Jews seem to have derived it. Strangely

enough, the episcopal office is not a distant

derivative but is endowed with certain astonishing fixtures which show its direct

Asiatic contacts. The oldest bishop’s staves were the caduceus and thunder arrow, and

they bore on them such dread inscriptions as

“Strike” and “Destroy,” appropriate only to

the divine weapon.

There was no Persian institution better

known to the West in ancient times than that of the “King’s Eyes” and the “King’s

Ears”—the royal spies who told the divine

king all that was going on in the world.

Ancient literature is full of references to like institutions. In the same passage in which he describes these officers, Xenophon

discourses on the Persian king as the Good

Shepherd—one need not, therefore, think the

terminology is purely accidental or far-

fetched.192 According to a very early epistle attributed to Evaristus, “the deacons are the bishop’s eyes in every city; there should be

seven on duty when the bishop preaches, lest anyone of the song [literally of his own

people!] speak disrespectfully or make any

move against him, or treat lightly the divine word.” 193 In turn, the bishop himself is described in a letter attributed to Alexander of Rome as “the eyes of the Lord,” and the

conclusion from that is very significant—

namely, that anyone who crosses a bishop is

guilty of the crime of lèse-majesté. 194 That is, we have here the bishop holding the

power of a temporal king, modeled on

accepted Oriental concepts. “Bishops are to

be judged by God alone,” says a letter

supposedly of Pius I, “who has chosen them

as his eyes. ”195 After describing the functions of the bishop in terms of Numbers, i.e., the Old Testament pattern, the Apostolic Constitutions notes: “Since therefore you are skopoi [literally “lookouts,”

“inspectors,” or “spies”], you yourselves are

under the inspection [ skopos] of Christ.” 196

Later the same source announces that “the

deacons are the bishop’s eyes, ears, mouth,

heart, souls … as Jethro took the load from

Moses.” 197

K. G. Goetz has surmised that the Gentile

Christians adopted the name of episcopus in preference to the old Jewish title,

archisynagogus, in precisely the same way in which they took over ekklesia in

preference to the usual Jewish synagogue. 198

This would confirm our contention that the

origin of the conventional Christian

bishopric is to be found in the same place as the origin of its rites and liturgies—with the Jews and pagans, and not with the apostles.

Granted that James the brother of the Lord

was “a unique phenomenon without

survival,” Linton asks, where did the local

churches get their bishops and their

organization? There are two answers to this,

he explains: (1) the Jewish origin theory, which everyone accepted until in the 1880s

when Giovanni Battista de Rossi, the papal

archaeologist, and others suggested

(2) pagan models, to be found in those

collegia—clubs and social common-interest

groups—which swarmed in the world of late

antiquity.199 In neither case was the origin

“apostolic.” Every possible type of ancient

society was then put forward by this or that school to explain the emergence of the later church organization, but no agreement was

reached.

First Clement says the apostles

themselves set up bishops based on Old

Testament models, and from the language the

author uses, he appears to be engaging in a

little personal speculation: certainly he

quotes no official doctrine to that effect. 200

Matthew succeeded Judas, says the

Apostolic Constitutions, according to the

dictates of Psalm 109:8: “Let another take his oversight [ episkopeia].” 201 In the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, the apostle and bishop appear in Jewish garb:

“Until the time when the most high shall send out [ aposteilei] his salvation, in the oversight [ episkopei] of his Only

Begotten.” 202 The survival of Israel was a thorn in the side of the Christian church,

blighting all its claims to being the last and ultimate development in the unfolding of

God’s plan on earth. The organization of

Jewish society in the Middle Ages can

hardly have been an imitation of the

Christian, yet we have attempts at a centrally organized Jewish church documented in the

writings of Benjamin of Tudela, who

describes how “permission is granted by the

Prince of the Captivity to all the Jewish

congregations of these different countries to elect rabbis and ministers, all of whom

appear before him in order to receive consecration [it was by laying on of hands]

and the permission to officiate, upon which

occasions presents and valuable gifts are

offered to him even from the remotest

countries.” 203 But who ordains the Prince of the Captivity? The caliph, successor to

Muhammad as head of Islam! Of the Jewish

congregations of Europe, Benjamin says,

“they send letters to one another by which

they exhort themselves to hold firm in the

mosaic law.” 204

The exact parallel to Christian institutions is here no more striking than that to the

usages of Asiatic kingship. The emergence of papal institutions throughout the world

follows hard upon the establishment of the

office of religious overseer, or bishop—we

find them both wherever we look, with no

indication that they began with the Christian church. One is not left here to vague surmise,

however, as the study of church vestments quickly reveals the priority of pagan

institutions, especially Asiatic, over the

Christian ones. This we will treat below.

Changes in the Office of Bishop

There is no dearth of early texts describing the functions of the lower priesthood.

Immediately after comparing them with the

apostles, Polycarp describes the work of the presbyters. It is strictly of a local, temporal nature—they are to visit the sick, help the

poor, preserve good order generally in the

church. That is all. 205 So much for their

“apostolic” calling. The ancient office of

deacon was the same—to help the bishop

generally in the performance of the strictly temporal tasks and odd jobs of the church.

Later on the priests and deacons become

inspired teachers—a function totally foreign to their original calling—and in that they

illustrate a like change in the office of bishop. As the bishop’s assistants, they must be spiritual if he is spiritual, yet nothing is more certain than the fact that in the

beginning their office was temporal. Also

nothing is more certain than that their calling was never separated from that of the bishop

—they are always and everywhere a single

team. Therefore in the undoubted nature of

their work, we have the key to the bishop’s

own calling, and in the radical theoretical

change of orientation that their offices

underwent we see evidence for a like change

of orientation in the episcopal calling.

But we need not confine ourselves to such

secondary evidence, however convincing.

For the nature and function of no

ecclesiastical office is so well, so often, and so fully described, both directly and

indirectly, as that of bishop. Out of many

studies of the word episcopus emerges a

consensus: the bishop is an inspector sent by a higher authority to examine local

conditions. He examines and reports; to do

that he must stay on the ground. From the

inscriptions “no fixed meaning of the word’s content has been found; … just as the word

apostle, it is ein inhaltleeres Beziehungswort [meaningless epithet]. ”206 It was the Christians who gave it a definite

content. For them the bishop was chief local officer, but it is very significant that he was not elected by the society of which he was in charge—they merely sustained him by a

show of hands. It was a higher authority that put him in charge.

Change in qualification and selection.

The local election theory has now been

given up. One of the most actively discussed questions has been that of the plurality of

bishops: why the plurality? It seems strange that this should have been a question at all.

There was a plurality of bishops because there was a multiplicity of places requiring direction and administration. The question

would never have arisen were it not for the

determination of churchmen to see the

bishops as apostolic general authorities,

which by their very number they could not

have been. The office and function of bishop is clearly marked from the first, but if we

accept what is shown us, then the later

concept of bishops as rulers of the whole

church rather than of local churches alone is completely discredited. And so we are not

allowed to accept the record as it stands but must seek for great and hidden mysteries to

explain a glaring contradiction. The

contradiction is not in the record—there is

no contradiction here at all—but in the need and determination of the churches to make

out of the bishop something that he was not.

Bishops took over the work of apostles, who

could not stay in one place more than three nights, while as bishops they could not leave one place more than three weeks.

While pointing out that the office of bishop was a spiritual, religious, peculiarly

Christian one, Harnack noted that it was

vastly different in its busy practicality from the functions of those prophets, teachers,

evangelists, etc., whose concern was to

teach the church by revelation from heaven.

Many texts on the qualifications and training of bishops bear that out fully. The “inspired men” whom Justin Martyr describes as the

true teachers and leaders of the early church differed from the great men of the world

precisely in having no formal education and

in relying at no time on any skill in rhetoric or logic. 207 This point is exploited by Tertullian, Origen, Clement of Alexandria,

the Clementine Recognitions, etc. Yet formal education and skill in rhetoric and

logic are the very things most consistently prescribed for bishops. In the pseudo-Clementine letters to James, Clement tries to avoid the office of bishop with its heavy

worldly preoccupation and concern. 208 Many priests in the fourth century tried to avoid the office on the significant grounds that it meant giving up the spiritual life. It is for that reason that Peter was said to have handed

over the office to Linus, Clement, and Cletus.

The spiritual life was the very essence of

apostleship. To return to the pseudo-

Clementine letters, Peter insists that Clement take over the office: You are the best

qualified of all, he says, you lead a moral

life, you are well instructed in the doctrine, and you have been with me and heard me

preach more than anyone else… . So the

sooner you agree, the quicker you will

relieve me of a great worry. 209 This is not the way God calls a man to an office: here is

no mention of the will of God, no mention of revelation. Note the strictly practical and

worldly ground on which Clement is chosen:

he is qualified by character, training, and

experience. The qualifications for a bishop

set forth by the apostolic fathers are the

same: they are all the very qualities one

would demand of any public leader—and no

more. Above all, their concern is for “public order.” This we shall consider closer when

we view the bishop in civil life. As to his

strictly religious concerns, a letter attributed to Telesphorus says the bishop’s faith must

be “in apostolorum eruditione fundatam

[having been founded upon the learning of

the apostles].” 210

“A bishop,” says the Apostolic

Constitutions “must be trained and

experienced in speech [ logos]. … He must not be over fifty years old” 211—can one imagine such a limitation on an apostle,

prophet, evangelist, or any inspired office?

He must be especially competent to handle

“the blasphemies of certain pseudo-brethren

which are being inflicted upon many” and so

“must be trained and experienced in the

word, as befits his age. ”212 It reminds us, however, that there are exceptions, that

Solomon and Josiah were chosen when

young—as ever, the examples are drawn

from the Old Testament record and not from

apostolic sources. As the description in the Apostolic Constitutions goes on, it becomes apparent that the only peculiarly Christian

qualification of a bishop is training in

Christian doctrine: nothing is said of

inspired gifts. “He must be the husband of

one wife. … He must be sober, reliable

[ pistos], and neat [ kosmios—one thinks of the wonderful unneatness of certain

prophets]. ”213 Since the Lord said to Moses, be no respecter of persons, the bishop should

act accordingly—note that when an identical passage appears both in the Old Testament

and the New Testament, no mention is made

of the New Testament: everything indicates

the Mosaic system as the pattern. Of course

the bishop should teach by example, as

Christ did: “first do, then teach.” His title, according to this source, comes from Ezekiel 33:2–3: the bishop sits as a judge and

teacher, exactly as the pəqûḏhîm of ancient Israel. He is a disciplinary officer. He is the leader, not the follower; he does not yield to the rebellious layman but takes his orders

from God alone. He receives those orders,

as he does his doctrine, through the

scriptures. He is not an infallible prophet, but a fallible man, and must remember that

“everybody makes mistakes.” 214 “The bishop must take thought and consider how to keep

the people from getting off the track since he is their supervisor.” 215 As shepherd, he will

be held responsible. How is a bishop to be judged? Ezekiel 34:17 is the key: bishop to

bishop, layman to layman, prince to

prince. 216 And the people themselves will be responsible for following a bad shepherd:

“As rational beings, the sheep are

answerable for their own behavior and

obliged to avoid pernicious pastors.” 217

There is much written about the judging of

bishops—by whom and how it is to be done.

This is in marked contrast to the rule of the Didache, that an apostle or prophet, being under the direct working of the Spirit, is not to be judged by anyone. 218

Change in functions and duties. The bishop stands in a contractual relationship to a society. Not so the higher officers, who are social officers: Bishops shall minister to the traveling general brethren as their superiors, according to the Didache. 219 Bishops, the Apostolic Constitutions continues, should be

gentle, not imperious, shepherds, for they are physicians of the church of the Lord.220 The bishop is an officer of peace: the

preservation of peace and order in his

community is a prime concern. They must

judge as God judges—charitably. The

examples cited are David, Manasseh, the

case of Nineveh, and others—all from the

Old Testament. 221 A bishop who expels a righteous man from the community is worse

than a murderer, for he does not take a

proper skopos [view, study] of the

situation.222 Always the text plays on the word episkopos—inspect, consider, study, examine, etc. J.-P. Migne, the editor of the Patrologiae Graecae, thinks the Apostolic Constitution is very inept.223 This doctrine of the episcopal office itself comes from

Christ, we are told, “being commensurate

with his glorious utterances.” 224 This is what is meant by direction from heaven.

The “spiritual” nature of the bishop’s office is illustrated by the declaration: If we should honor our physical parents, “how

much more our spiritual ones … who

baptized us, filled us with the Holy Ghost,

nourished us with the word of salvation …

forgave our sins,” etc.225 And again, if we honor and support kings and rulers, how

much more so the bishop? How much more

should we pay to feed him and his clerics

whom God has established: “Priesthood is

greater than kingship in the exact proportion as the spirit is greater than the body.” 226

Now these are well-known, maybe

threadbare, commonplaces of the schools:

nothing is more immediate to the vice of

allegorizing than that of “spiritualizing” all things, and allegory is not failing in the

above passage. Nothing was more natural,

easy, inevitable than to “spiritualize” the

episcopal calling by these Platonic clichés.

In the same beautifully figurative sense, “the bishop in the judgment hall has the Christ of God to sustain and vote with him.” 227 “The bishop is like the pilot of a great ship: the deacons are the crew, the members the well-behaved cargo full of careful scruples and

decent behavior. The church building must

be long and face the East … like a ship. The bishop’s throne must be in the middle with

the presbyters’ sects on either side with the deacons standing at attention like sailors

lightly clad,” etc. 228 Let visiting deacons sit with the deacons, visiting presbyters with the presbyters, and a visiting bishop with the

bishop. 229 No layman shall perform priestly work: baptism, sacrifice, the laying on of

hands, or the eulogia. The bishop, and he alone, shall lay on hands. Imitating Solomon, the bishop shall instruct the people to deal kindly with the poor. 230 The bishop must be ordained by three bishops, or at the very

least by two. A presbyter must be ordained by one bishop and the rest of the clergy. A

presbyter can teach, baptize, offer sacrifices, and eulogein [exhort] the people; a deacon can minister for the bishop and presbyters

but not for the people. 231

A bad bishop, we are further told, is not

really a bishop, having been appointed not

by God but by men. 232 In support of this, many Old Testament examples are cited of

kings and rulers who were punished for

going beyond their authority. Interestingly, the remark is made that though Silas and

Agabus were prophets they did not claim to

be equal to the apostles233—showing that apostolic men, even inspired ones, were not

thought thereby to have the authority of

apostles. The lector “is to serve the church as Esdras of Old, reading thy laws to the

people.” 234 Widows are to be ordained

“after the type of Judith and Anna.” 235 But

virgins, as such, are not to be ordained,

“since the Lord left no instructions” to that effect.236 But where did he instruct about ordaining widows? One attributes what one

wishes to the Lord, and when one does not

wish, points to his silence on the subject. In the 127 Canons, the Lord is represented as instructing the apostles: “Determine the

order of the bishops, the seating of the

priests, the duties of the deacons, the

capacities of the readers, widows without

sin, and the activities necessary to the

founding of the church”—so they “did it after the pattern of what is in heaven. ”237 Here it is possible to attribute to the Lord what was traditionally regarded as strictly the work of apostles. Such a convenient extension of

things is seen in the same text, which

improves on the scriptures: “It is good that he be not married, but if he already is

married, that he be ‘the husband of one wife.’

” Thus the later episcopal office was written into the scriptures by a revamping of

1 Timothy 2:2–3 and Titus 1:6–12, which is

patently absurd but which shows how easy it

was to “control” the apostles.

Such liberties are even more apparent in

what follows. The apostle John says, “The

bishop should have two priests for

assistants,” but all the other apostles object, saying that not two but three are required,

since there are twenty-four elders: twelve on the right hand and twelve on the left. “That is right,” says John, “those on the right hand

will take the cup from the chiefs of the

angels and carry it to the Lord, and those on the left are over all the angels. The priests must be of advanced age, beyond the age of

marriage and united in the love of their

chief.” 238 So angels may be drawn into the system at will. The deacons, says this

source, hold no priesthood: the bishop only

lays his hands upon his head but utters no words, because a deacon does not stand

among the priests but is simply a helper to

the bishop. His business is to do odd jobs

and keep the bishop informed as to what is

going on. The deacon is not supposed to be a teacher, for “he is not allowed to share in the spirit of greatness in which the priests have share.” He is to try to do everything to

please the bishop—that is why the bishop

puts his hands upon his head. The priest, on the other hand, receives the laying on of

hands of the bishop and all the priests that are with him, at which time the Holy Ghost

descends upon him. But still the priest,

though receiving the same spirit as the

bishop, has no right to give orders as the

bishop does; therefore he only ordains

priests in cooperation with the bishop. 239 In the early church, deacons were ordained not

by bishops but by apostles, along with and at

the same time as the bishops, but now have either lost their authority or never had it. But they did have it. They must have lost it,

therefore, as did those who were

coordained: bishops and presbyters.

Confessors, in recognition of their merits,

were said to receive an honorary diaconate

and/or priesthood without any laying on of

hands, such being necessary only if those

parties became bishops. 240 By what right are these concessions made? What general

authority has been consulted? If anyone

claims the gift of healing, says the 127

Canons, he shall not be established by laying on of hands, but prove his claim by the

event. 241 Though tithes go to the support of clerics and others, firstfruits are exclusively for priests and ministers, following the old Jewish law.242

The earliest letter from the hand of the

Christian is that of Pope Maximos of

Alexandria (264–282). In this we find the bishop actively engaged in commercial

affairs—not his own but those of the church.

“Egyptian provincial Christians employ the

highest ecclesiastic in the country as their confidential agent in money affairs, ”243

comments Adolf Deissmann with amazement.

“The link between the Christian corn-sellers in the Fayûm and their agent in Rome is …

the Papas of Alexandria!” 244 When one considers that this is the earliest description of a bishop’s activity, it is most significant.

Both Justin Martyr and Tertullian speak of

elders ( seniores) presiding or acting as presidents at meetings245—plainly such an officiant did not need to be a bishop, as we have seen above. Cyprian, in the third

century, advises deacons always to

remember that “the Lord chose apostles, that is to say, bishops and leaders, while deacons were established by the apostles only after

the ascension of the Lord to heaven for their episcopate and for the ministry of the

church.” 246 The sweeping “that is to say” is as significant as the denial of priesthood to the deacons because they were only installed by apostles. Only! Cyprian is trying to save the bishops from the same fate as the

deacons and he does it by the most obvious

word juggling. Both have lost their authority, but while he must admit the fact for the

deacons, he can only save the bishops by

identifying them completely, and without

question or discussion, with the apostles

whom the Lord chose.

Eusebius says that “James first received

the throne of the church of Jerusalem and the episcopate from the Lord himself, and from

the apostles, according to the divine

words.” 247 Eusebius was determined to make the bishops the successors of the

apostles, yet like the others he can produce

no proof but only an awkward assumption.

The claim that James got his office from the Lord himself is in conflict with all other

sources, yet Eusebius sees that it must so be if James is to have the same kind of authority as the apostles, who were all personally

appointed.

The first duty of the bishop, says Ambrose,

is to teach. “But there is but one true master,”

and bishops like everyone else must study

and learn before they are ready to teach.248

Then in his writing entitled On the Offices of the Ministry, Ambrose makes the surprising statement that his whole essay could be

written using nothing but phrases taken “from the schools of philosophy” since they teach

the same as the scriptures. 249 By the fourth century, scripture meant a very special and peculiar reading of the scripture—not its

literal sense. This is the strange twist the church gave to a promise which the ancient

church understood in a diametrically opposite sense. Since there is only one

teacher for the church, the ancients said, the one qualification for those who would teach

the church is not study and learning, but

direct dictation from the One who knows. 250

Starting from the same premise, Ambrose

now comes to the opposite conclusion: since

there is only One Teacher, he says, no one

else can speak with his voice, but every

bishop must study and learn to speak as men

must—in the school. 251 “Ecclesiastical men,” says Ambrose’s great contemporary,

Jerome, “who meditate on the law of God

day and night cannot be deceived.” 252 This came in reply to Pelagius’s claim that

revelation was an indispensable prerequisite to infallibility. Nonsense! says Jerome, if

men only meditate hard enough, they will

always be right. This was the bland

assurance of the schools—it would have

made a primitive Christian smile. But Jerome also assures us that “not all bishops are bishops… . Ecclesiastical dignity does

not make a Christian.” 253 In fact, in a later discussion Jerome sees through the flimsy

argument easily enough: “I know that this

question has been variously disputed by the

most learned men,” he writes of a point in

Daniel 9, “and everyone of them decides it,

saying what he thinks on the basis of his own cleverness. Since therefore it is dangerous to judge between the opinions of the magisters

of the church, and to prefer one to the other, I will say what each one thinks and leave it to the reader which opinion he feels he should

follow.” 254 The early apologists all made much of the fact that there was a perfect unity of opinion among the ancient apostles,

precisely because they did not judge matters

“on the basis of their own cleverness,” as the teachers of the church do in Jerome’s day.

Surely bishops lack whatever it was that made an apostle an apostle.

Roman Origin of a Divine Office?

It is a truism that the establishment of

Christianity as the big popular church at the end of the ancient world was largely due to

the influence of city bishops, who emerged

during the time of troubles that accompanied the fall of the empire as the natural leaders of their societies. Their courage, devotion, and enterprise are too well known to need a

description or encomium at this point. But

such men were not a new thing in the cities

of the Mediterranean. The pious, inspired

leader who gives his all for his city and

guides it by his wisdom, courage, and skill is a stock figure in the Greek tragedy, where he is already designated as episkopos. Like the kings of the East such an one is called the

“shepherd,” and the people, the citizens, are his flock. 255 The leading man of the town had an influence that went beyond that of his

office: “Whom have the people to imitate,”

Epictetus asks of a friend, a high official in a provincial city whom he is rebuking for

undignified behavior, “except you their

superior, the governor, friend of Caesar, and his procurator? ”256 “The city teaches the man,” said Simonides257—and that in the broadest sense.

The world of late antiquity was a city-

world; each city was an island universe,

completely engrossed in its own affairs and

wholly under the rule and sway of leading

personalities. The local kings had sunk to

ritual figures, but the need and hunger for

leadership was as great as ever. The whole

society crystallized around its leaders, but by what right did they lead? By popular

choice—that was the democratic principle.

But popular choice has rather vague rules of succession that brought ceaseless unrest and the chronic disease of the antique world—

faction, stasis.

Because Rome was the most important city

in the ancient world, the nature of its popular government is of particular significance and is very well documented. The basis of all

Roman politics, writes Theodor Mommsen,

is of three principles: (1) that an official gives direct commands, (2) that the Senate is the highest authority in the state, and (3) that all things must be sanctioned by a sovereign popular assembly. 258 All office was magistracy, and all magistrates were priests in Rome: the political structure was also the state church. The great significance of

priesthood in public life, says Georg

Wissowa, lay in the fact that “its bearers all held at the same time the highest civil offices and so played the decisive role in the

Senate.” 259 Certain rights and privileges the common people claimed for themselves at

all times: they claimed the right to

spontaneous, direct, uncontrolled demonstrations for some outstanding person.

Such demonstrations were the antithesis of

the orderly subordination which was the

ideal of the ruling families and went back to the old days of the kings. Thus when

Publicola died, he was publicly buried and

honored by a year-long mourning of the

matrons. 260 Menenius was buried by passing the hat among the plebes while the Senate,

not to be put to shame, contributed land for his sepulchre.261 It was a rule laid down by the aristocrats, once they had abolished the popular kingship, “that wherever a multitude was, there should be a lawful governor of

that multitude present” 262—appointed by themselves.

The spirit of the aristocratic rule always

fighting to hold its own, always moralizing

and appealing to fake traditions to inspire

loyalty and submission, is shown in the story

of the Alban migration to Rome. All the poorer people went to the king, says

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, and clamored to

settle in Rome and divide up the new land

equally. But the more illustrious and the

more important of the people, whether by

merit or by chance, resented leaving their

holdings and their ancestral hearths, so the Senate planned to check the business by a

call to arms. There was an uproar in the

popular assembly at this, and the nobles

immediately had the assemblage surrounded

by soldiers—their own retainers with drawn

swords. Then Tullus gave them a speech:

Tomorrow, he said, your city will be

destroyed and you must all go to Rome and

take what you find there. 263 Expedience and self-interest inspired that firm sense of rule and right, which the Romans always flattered themselves was an abstract moral principle.

Against it there were the ancient folk

practices which no declarations of law or philosophy could suppress: when a man was

popular with the Roman people, nothing on

earth could keep them from demonstrating in

his favor and escorting him through the

streets. In the end the highest and holiest

office in the state, that of the imperator, rested wholly on one thing alone—

spontaneous popular acclaim. An ancient

grave inscription from the Appian Way is

typical of the public spirit of Rome:

“Stranger, stop and look. Here the city holds the bones of a good merciful son, a lover of the poor. I beseech thee, wayfarer, do no

injury to this monument.” 264 Cicero praises

“Tuditanus, who in pallium and high boots

used to throw out coins to the people from

the rostrum. ”265 Such a generous soul would receive, in recognition for his public spirit, the title of father. A man might give such a public donative in memory of his father, “in

his father’s name.” “The Roman people disapprove of private luxury,” wrote Cicero,

“but admire public magnificence”; therefore, he argues, “candidates to public office ought not to be forbidden the exercise of that

kindness which is liberality rather than

bribery.” 266 Naturally the seeds of abuse lay in such a system, which finally destroyed

itself.

In imperial times only the emperor was

allowed to give popular donatives—the right

was jealously forbidden to all others, for to give a public gift was to vie with the

emperor in popularity. 267 The emperor on his part, however, was under constant and heavy

obligation to keep up a steady outpouring of donatives. “As Ersatz for the political rights of which the emperors robbed the Roman

people,” said Viktor E. Gardthausen, “we

may consider the duty of providing public

sustenance which the emperors took over,

not as their victorious general … but as the richest man in the city,” following a very

ancient tradition. 268 The obligation of the best-fixed citizen to be a leader in the

community was supported by ample rewards

in a world in which “every municipal

government could be summarized in two

terms: the honor of the city (a second

religion with the Romans), and the dignity of the citizen.” 269 The first of these meant constant rivalry among the cities to outshine each other; the second, among the

individuals of any one city.

From this it is easy to see that the

ascendancy of a particular man in the city as a bishop would not be a new or sensational

thing. Any man holding such an office would

naturally be expected to be a model of

dignity and deportment, but also of kindness, generosity, and popularity. Religious

communities within cities—the ubiquitous

colleges—followed the same pattern. Thus, during a festival, people in the great cities made fun of the Roman origin of the Emperor

Alexander Severus by calling him a Syrum archisynagogum [high synagogue] and an archierum [high priest]. 270 In the time of Belisarius, Procopius tells us, the chief men of African towns were nearly all priests.

Sidonius’s account to a friend of how “there you stood, with a fine grace … half torn to

pieces by the people madly rushing to salute you, but so loyally responsive to this popular devotion that those who took the greatest

liberties seemed surest of your most

generous acknowledgments” might have been

written by Cicero, but it describes the

popular acclaim not of a hero of the

Republic, but of a local bishop.271

When a debtor came to him seeking

sanctuary in the church, Augustine took up a public collection and thus paid off the debt.

But such a public collection was an accepted Roman practice, and Augustine as a bishop

was simply fulfilling the office as would

normally be expected of the head man of the

city. Augustine’s own election to his high

office, like that of his friends, was strictly a popular gesture: the people chanted his name over and over again in front of his house and would have torn him to pieces had he not

accepted the honor which it was their right to bestow. 272 For every bishop had to be elected by the people of the city and their

vote took the old form of the popular

acclamatio. Ambrose was thus made bishop of Milan before he was even a Christian. It

is no wonder that for him the words populus and fideles are absolutely interchangeable—

he makes no distinction between the old city populace and the Christian congregation—

they are one and the same, and the man who

leads them is no gift of apostolic insight to

the world. Jerome makes layman the equivalent of plebes, and Leo the Great uses only plebes, never populi, which shows that he recognizes the pagan implications as well as Ambrose did a hundred years before him;

but whereas Ambrose admits the fact, Leo

would sooner avoid it. But Hermann Usener

has pointed out that “In the record of the

daily schedule of the papal chancellery, the liber diurnus, edited at the beginning of the eighth century, it is still customary, after mentioning the clergy expressly, to include

the nobility and the populace of the city as factors in the choosing of the pope.” 273 And exactly as distinguished ancients had

competed bitterly for the highest honors of

the city by rival largesses and all sorts of political tricks and popular appeals, so rival candidates for the office of bishop continued to play the same game with the same pieces

and for identical stakes.

Of course, such a thing as a candidate to an apostolic office is unthinkable—the Lord

alone chooses apostles, but these men were

candidates in every sense of the word. “The

defensor of the Roman Church has informed

us,” wrote Cassiodorus, “that lately, when a president was sought for the papal chair, so much were the usual largesses to the poor

augmented by the promises which had been

extorted from the candidate, that, shameful to say, even the sacred vessels were exposed to sale in order to provide the necessary

money.” 274 The riots in Rome among the pagans concerning the qualities of Clement

were quickly succeeded by identical

disputes within the Christian congregation of the city—identical in nature, but much worse

—and the rivalry between Damasus and

Liberius was not settled until the corpses of 137 of the faithful had been removed from

the scene of the controversy in St. Peter’s.

The first epistle of Clement deals with these very conditions in Corinth, which the writer finds “loathsome, disgusting, and

devilish.” 275

The elected bishop would often make the

most of his popularity in the approved pagan manner. Thus Bishop Firmilianus had all the

fixtures of a Roman noble: he would dictate

letters as he walked along in the

marketplace, followed by a large troop of

hangers-on. He erected for himself as a

tribune the high throne and secretum [judge’s chamber] of a Roman judge, and in speaking,

he slapped his thigh and stamped his foot just like any popular orator. 276 This was not the exception, but the rule. The priests of God

are, before all things, magistrates, Eusebius reminds us. “Whenever I have a case to try,”

says his great contemporary, Gregory

Nazianzus, “I do so, even when the accused

is one of my best friends or belongs to the

highest nobility, for nothing is superior to the law of God and of his church.” 277 Note the patronizing attitude, expressing as a noble

sentiment what anyone in a democratic state

would take for granted. The bishops are

plainly aristocrats, as we shall presently see.

“He would win my favor, I the people’s and

he and I together, yours,” writes Sidonius in a Ciceronian vein. The method of winning

favor in this case utilized shiploads of wheat and honey: “We should have these cargoes

ready in no time for the expectant

crowds.” 278

“The episcopal epoch, exactly like the

imperial epoch is, before all else, an epoch of municipal civilization. When the imperial machine collapsed, the cities remained

standing, solid pieces of the ancient defense structure. ”279 Note the exact parallel between the emergence of the city supreme

and the local church supreme: in both cases

it was the passing of a central authority that left local authority the only and therefore the highest in the oecumene [entire inhabited world]. But just as a city prefect does not

have the authority of an emperor because an

emperor installed him and then passed away,

neither does a local bishop have the

authority of an apostle because an apostle

installed him and then passed away. “The

Christian population in each city,” according to Duchesne, once the ubiquitous, traveling

general authorities were no more, “raised

itself from the position of an imperceptible minority to that of a respectable minority; it finally became the majority, and then the

unanimity… . The fourth century saw the last acts of this transformation almost

everywhere, at least as far as concerns the

city masses.” 280 Now when these

“imperceptible minorities” were bade

farewell by the apostles, they were, to say

the least, in a bad way; in the days of the apostolic fathers they had become even

worse—utterly corrupt within themselves.

Yet from that point they grew to complete

domination without the guide of any apostles or general authorities. How could they win

over the urban masses without being like

them? They could not: “They were

Christians,” writes Duchesne of the newly

converted masses of the fourth century, but

they were Christians in the only way such

people could be—in name only. 281 The early Christians had wanted none of this sort of

thing, as the world had wanted none of them: Unam omnium rempublicam agnoscimus

— mundum [We acknowledge a single

republic for everyone—the world],

Tertullian declared. 282 This indeed was the Jewish heritage—Moses taught that all the

world was a single state, writes Philo. 283 It was always popular for bishops to deplore

the busy preoccupations of the world in which they found themselves, yet the whole

nature of their office was just such busy

preoccupation. “Following the voice of

God,” wrote Nicephorus to Leo III, “I turned from all honors and authority and from the

restless ambition of the royal court and city affairs.” 284 But he soon found out that actually to leave those things in deed as well as word could only mean ceasing to be a

bishop. After all, such denunciation of the

noise and distraction of empty affairs was

ever stock with the schools, and the Sophists worked it to death as a means of furthering

their public careers.

The Importance of Each Bishop

Becomes Tied to the Prominence of

His City

The preeminence of Rome. Every bishop in Christendom has his office designated by

the name of a city. No one doubts that the office of bishop is primarily a city office.

The perpetual leadership of the church,

according to the bull Unam Sanctam, is in the succession of Peter,285 “which succession is to be found in the bishop of the city of Rome.” 286 Early Christianity was a city religion. It had to be if the apostles were to carry out their great assignment. It spread, says Norman H. Baynes, “from the

provincial capital … to the country-side,” so that “the provincial capital came to be

regarded as the mother church.” 287 The last expression is strictly in the heathen tradition.

Polycarp wrote that “faith is the Mother of

all of us,” 288 and Eusebius says “all men had God for a Father, and for a Mother, true

piety. ”289 The idea of mother church is something else—it is simply the mother city.

A center from which settlements were spread

in a colony was always called the “mother

city” or metropolis. Chrysostom calls the church of Antioch “our mother and the

mother of all the churches. Mother, not only because she is first in age, but because she was built up by apostolic hands.” 290 Which is he praising, the church of Antioch or the city of Antioch? They are inseparable. In the best known of all pagan hymns, Horace

prays that the sun may never shine on

anything greater than Alma Roma. 291 One of the earliest bishops of Rome is represented

as signing himself “Hyginius in Christ’s

name episcopus of Almae Urbis Romae,”

using Horace’s own expression.292 Note, he is not “bishop of the mother church,” but

“bishop of the mother city of Rome”—that

title having been used long before the

Christians. Because he was bishop of such

an important city, he must have been an

important bishop, and his glory derives from his city, not from his apostolic calling. As

we have seen, the earliest bishops made no appeal to any apostolic authority. “From the moment when Christianity aspired to

embrace the Orbis Romanus in its entirety,”

writes Duchesne, “it could have no other

capital [than Rome]. It was, besides that,

consecrated as it were by the preaching and

death of the two great apostles. … Rome,

capital of the empire, seat of St. Peter, holy place of the apostles, became without

dispute the metropolis—the mother city—of

the church.” 293

Now, though there is no proof that Peter

was ever a bishop at Rome, and nothing at

all to indicate that the apostles thought of the city as holy (it was indeed abominable

Babylon for the early Christians, as

Duchesne often reminds us in other passages

discretely distant from this one), 294 there is one point none will dispute, and Duchesne

wisely begins his argument with it, so that

the other very dubious points will seem to follow from it as corollaries: that is the point that Rome was the first city of the world.295

When the importance of a bishop came to be

measured directly by the importance of his

city, the bishop of Rome would of course

come first. But Duchesne should never have

used such an argument at all. The primacy of the pope is supposed to rest on the claim to a special office inherited directly from Christ through Peter and not (of all things) on the bigness and importance of a city. Yet it was not Duchesne who first saw in the

importance of the city the foundation of its bishop’s claim to primacy. Eusebius honors

Julius of Rome as “the leader of the imperial (or ruling) city” in a discussion wherein he argues that the leader of the church is

Constantine. 296 Everyone knew that Rome was the imperial city, and everyone knew

that Julius was its bishop—but not a word as

to his having any primacy in the church.

According to the Byzantine writers, “the

governor [ eparchos] of Rome is not the Roman emperor (who had long ceased to

live in Rome), but the chief man in Rome, the pontifex,” a political figure. 297

A flawed principle. The principle that a bishop was exactly as important as his city is certainly not a holy one and certainly was

not known to the ancient church, but by the

fourth century it became the guiding

principle of general church organization.

According to Baynes, when a traveling

apostolate proved far more inadequate than

anything subsequently invented, “we hear

during the latter half of the second century of the gathering of bishops in councils. ”298

Does the traveling apostolate, inadequate

and outdone, raise any objections? Is there

any whisper of jealousy, of rivalry, or of

overlapping areas of authority? What does

the inadequate apostolate have to say on the matter? Who consults it before going about

setting up the new system? What Baynes

conveniently overlooks is not that the

apostolate was inadequate—it was

nonexistent. From the first, the organization of these meetings of bishops is very

significant: it is always the bishops of a

particular province that come together, and

they always meet in the capital of that

province. That is natural enough. The

restored church has always organized its

missions corresponding to geographical and

linguistic boundaries—after all, it was the

nations to which the apostles preached, and

they preached to them as nations, fully

recognizing the convenience of established

political boundaries and divisions. By about the middle of the third century, regular

meetings of bishops were being held in each

province once a year. The general Council of

Nicaea made this practice compulsory. What was more natural than that the bishop of the capital city to which all the other bishops

had to come for the conference should be the one to make all arrangements for the meeting, the housing of the bishops, the exact time and place of the sessions, and should be the one to send out the notices? And what is more

natural than that such functions should

bestow upon him a kind of headship over the

others? Upon nothing did the early church

insist more emphatically than the absolute

equality of bishops, but there was a strong

historical force at work.

The more important the city, the more

important the bishop, was a principle which

was not necessary while the church enjoyed

the guidance of traveling general authorities, and the early emergence of the principle is

thus another witness of the absence of

general authority in the church. Had there

been a need in the church, that head with general authority of course would have

determined the importance of any office and

of the divisions of the church and not left it to the purely mechanical and secular

calculations of the census taker. Churchmen

have recognized this and have tried to deny

anything but a perfect resemblance between

the two systems. Thus Duchesne insists that

in delimiting the areas of ecclesiastical

authority, the provinces of the church, though having the same name and the same area as

the provinces of the empire, did not copy

those provinces but were identical with them by virtue of having the same cause or

origin.299 This argument is as absurd as it is disingenuous. 300 There had been plenty of historical accidents to influence the final

configuration of provincial boundaries,

which were by no means the result of purely

physical considerations, and those historical

accidents were not duplicated hundreds of years later as the church spread. “At the

Council of Nicaea,” he observes, “the

grouping of bishops by provinces and their

subordination to the bishop of the civil

metropolis are already an accomplished

fact… . The provinces to which the council

refers are those of the time, those which

Diocletian had formed.” 301 So they were formed by Diocletian, not the apostles. There is nothing apostolic about this—but is there anything wrong with it? There is, for the

inevitable hierarchy among the bishops not

only wiped out the basic principle of

episcopal equality, but introduced an “order of the priesthood” in which rank was

assigned purely by the census taker, and this rank inevitably and quickly was taken as a

degree of holiness. The bigger the city, the holier its head. God does not work that way.

We readily agree with Duchesne that the

bishop of Rome would of course be a top man in the church,302 but could it be the true church if he owed his primacy to the

preeminence of his city, as the Council of

Constantinople in 381 made clear he did?

Originally the prima sedes [the senior episcopal see] was the oldest, not the

biggest, bishopric in a province. By all

accounts Jerusalem would be the prima

sedes— James the Just being always taken as the type and model of all bishops, as well as the first bishop. He was ordained not by two apostles (“double apostolate”), but by three

—the three highest; and his city was

sanctified not by the preaching and death

merely of apostles, but of the Lord himself.

The Council of Nicaea had to take special

recognition of Jerusalem: “Since it is the

prevailing custom and the ancient tradition, that the bishop of Aelia [Jerusalem] be

honored, so let his successor be in the future

… while the metropolis retains its dignity intact.” 303 This is a laborious special concession—on the present principle

Jerusalem has no claim, but is offered this

concession out of respect for tradition.

Jerusalem is not called by the scriptural

name which alone proclaims its unrivaled

primacy as the Holy City, and it is held in

respect only by virtue of a special decree to sustain its all but vanished dignity. Jerusalem as a city was nothing.

A few years later at Antioch the principle

was laid down that “the bishop in the

metropolis has charge of the entire province because all those who have any business

come together from all directions in the

metropolis; therefore, it was decided that he should accordingly be afforded a superior

honor and that the other bishops should

undertake nothing further without him.” 304

How neatly things have been reversed: once

the place was important because of the office, and the office was important because of the prophet who held it. Now the office is important because of the place, and the man

is important because of the office. Note that an archbishop is more holy than others not

because God has established such an office,

but specifically because he happens to live

in the capital where people come to do

business. But if the metropolitan was the

highest bishop in the affairs of a province, what about the relative ranks of

metropolitans? Were not some provinces

more important than others, just as some

cities were, and should not the holy principle of size and number be consistently applied to them? It should indeed. Constantine

remarked once to Eusebius that while

bishops within provinces could always

appeal to their metropolitan for judgment

when there were differences among them,

there would have to be one yet higher to appeal to when the metropolitans disagreed

among themselves—and he, Constantine,

was that man. 305 But after Constantine died there was trouble in agreeing upon a head of the church, and the Council of

Constantinople in 381 recognized reality by

proclaiming five dioceses “as resorts of an

ecclesiastical jurisdiction superior to that of the provinces or provincial synods.” 306

Needless to say, these were the four world

cities, plus little Jerusalem—the fifth wheel, the uncomfortable reminder of another day

and another order.

Following the civic pattern. The

hierarchy of bishop, metropolitan, and

patriarch was no more an invention of the

church than dioceses and provinces were. It

was taken over from the civil pattern, as

Baynes has shown: the metropolitan, called

“patriarch,” corresponds to the vicarius over

the imperial dioceses.307 The patriarch of Alexandria had unusual power over all

Egypt because the Hellenistic administration of Egypt had always been from a single

center—Alexandria—and the system had

been preserved by the Romans. “The

importance and precedence of a bishopric

depended upon the importance and

precedence within the Empire of the

bishop’s city.” 308 That was the rule: the famous third canon of the Council of

Constantinople in 381 declared that the

bishop of Constantinople should stand

second in honor to the bishop of Rome

“because the city of which he is bishop is New Rome. ”309

“The rank of churches,” says Baynes, “is

determined by the prominence of cities as

civil capitals.” 310 Letters attributed to the earliest popes, though not genuine, state the principle again and again, which is binding

on the church by at least the fourth century.

Bishops are not to be established in castellis

[military posts] or in smaller cities or villas, according to a decree of Befor—such places

should be managed by presbyters only, for

“the name of bishop should be used as title

and denomination only of an honorable

city. ”311 Here a big city is by definition an

“honorable” one, and only such an one can

have a bishop. What a significant norm for

apostolic holiness! The same letter notes that though “the provinces existed long before the time of Christ’s advent,” and are therefore of non-Christian origin, “the division was

renewed by the apostles and by the blessed

Clement, our predecessor,” so they are

Christian after all.312

Plainly our author feels there is something

wrong with ecclesiastical organization that

follows along strictly civil heathen lines: the perfect parallel of the two led to the belief,

held by such respected authorities as John Chrysostom, that the apostles actually took

over and administered the civil government

of the whole world in their day! A fantastic picture, but how is one otherwise to account for the fact that a church government that is supposed to have been set up in its

perfection by the apostles copies all its

forms from the pagans? Bishops are to

appeal to patriarchs or primates, says our

text, though they are called by different

names.313 There was considerable looseness in the nomenclature and the rank. An

archbishop, we are told, is the same as a

metropolitan, who gets his title from the fact that he presides in a metropolis, which is

defined as a city in which are located the

lower courts of law. 314 The civil pattern decides all these degrees of glory.

Another letter attributed to Anacletus says

that primates or patriarchs can only be

bishops of a city which is both a metropolis and has a church dating from the earliest

times. Lacking churches priscis temporibus

[dating from the earliest times], all the other big-city bishops are only archbishops or

metropolitans “because this corresponds to

the principles laid down in the civil law. ”315

“No archbishops are to be called primates,”

according to a letter attributed to Anicetus,

“unless they hold primas civitates, ” by which is meant not the first cities to receive the gospel, but the biggest cities: “they are called patriarchs and primates because of

their multitude,” this being, our letter

brazenly announces, “the rule of the apostles and their successors.” 316 Jerusalem was contemptuously pushed aside; it lacked one

thing—size. The holiest sees of Christendom

remained the four world cities of the time:

“Evidently the importance of these

respective churches due to their size and to

the dignity of their cities was the chief factor in winning for them this exceptional

recognition.” 317

Another letter of Anicetus tells how the

apostles Peter, James, and John ordained the most blessed James, who was called the

Just, and was even called the brother of the Lord after the manner of the flesh. 318 If three archbishops were necessary to ordain James,

our writer continues, “a bishop should

certainly not be ordained by less than three other bishops,” while an archbishop should

be ordained by even more. 319 In view of the nature and origin of the office of archbishop, to call Peter, James, and John archbishops is a supreme declaration of bankruptcy: this

very letter states that originally there was no difference among bishops, archbishops being

a later development.

A principle of power. The principle that made the glory of a bishopric a direct

function of the size and importance of its city was scrupulously observed in practice.

There was, of course, an important exception to the rule that bigness and importance were the same; the capital was the exception, as in the modern world. The Byzantine historian

Socrates (ca. A.D. 380–450) tells us that

many of the bishops recognized the

superiority of the bishop of Nicomedia

“because Diocletian had set up the imperial

headquarters at that place.” 320 This is perfectly consistent with the statement of the council that the bishop of a metropolis was

more important than other bishops because

the business of the province was done in his city and because of the statement of the

Council of Constantinople defining a

metropolis as a city where the provincial

courts of law were located. “As early as the year 42, Antioch had dethroned Jerusalem,”

according to Albert Dufourcq. “Antioch

appeared as the metropolis of infant Christianity; it was from there that the

apostles gradually spread the gospel

throughout the world.” 321 Duchesne has discoursed at length on how Milan ruled the

church as long as Milan was the capital: it

was there under the supervision of the

bishop of Milan that councils were held to

settle questions of priority and

subordination. It was to Milan and not to

Rome that the churches of the West appealed

for advice and instruction in matters of

organization and ritual; Milan, not Rome,

plays the leading role in the story of the

ritual and liturgy of the Western churches and to this day celebrates Mass after a rite

different from that of Rome. Why this

overwhelming, if only passing,

preponderance of Milan? “The true reason,”

writes Duchesne, “is that Milan was the

official imperial residence, the capital of the

empire of the West… . Milan was the great center of the Western church only because

she was the capital of the empire.” 322 This seems to explain away an embarrassing

phenomenon—the bishop of Milan was not

the real head of the church; he only acted as such while Milan was the capital. But that

raises as grave a question as it answers: If Rome were the rightful apostolic head of the church, then the size and importance of

Milan would have absolutely nothing to do

with the question, and the church would not

for a moment have taken orders from

Ambrose as it did. Much later, Rome was

accepted as the head of the church no matter where the capital was or how big it was. But in the fourth century and long after, the

capital city always laid claim to being the

headquarters of the church—a claim that was

universally respected. Duchesne has another

explanation of the embarrassing

phenomenon: “[Many churches] appealed to Milan … in preference to Rome,” he notes,

but that was “only because Milan was

nearer.” 323 A few miles difference in geographical proximity outweighs all the

claims of Rome! What a feeble argument! In

later centuries, when everyone believed in

Rome’s apostolic calling, such a

consideration would have been thought

ridiculous, if not blasphemous. When, during the Council of Sardica in 347, Julius, bishop of Rome, emerges as the most important

bishop, it is because Rome is again,

temporarily, the capital.

“By basing its claim to precedence on its

apostolic foundation,” writes Father John

Bligh, “the Roman see avoided the

humiliating position of the Patriarchate of

Constantinople, which frankly admitted that

its claim to the Primacy of Honor rested on

its connexion with the seat of Empire. ”324

What else could Constantinople do?

Everybody knew that it had not been founded

by the apostles, though Constantine tried to set up there the common tomb of all the

apostles. But Alexandria and Antioch based

their claims to precedence on apostolic

foundation just as much and quite as rightly as Rome. When Alexandria matched Rome’s

claim by announcing her foundation by two

apostles, Rome countered in 362 with the

doctrine of the double apostolate—which

led to embarrassing complications and was

later dropped. But as F. J. Badcock

observes, 325 there was no mention of apostolic succession in the orders of 325,

which maintained the customary privileges

of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, the sees

being in the order of their civic importance, but not of apostolic foundation. To evidence this, Jerusalem remained a suffragan see of

Caesarea (a much larger city) in spite of its

being the mother of all the churches. Later attempts to build up in retrospect a

theoretical apostolic foundation for the

Roman claim (discussed by Badcock) do not

obscure the eagerness with which the Roman

Church describes herself as the mistress of

the world by virtue of having inherited the

glory of ancient Rome—papal Rome gloried

in being the successor of imperial Rome

from whom she took what was peculiar and

distinctive in dress, ritual, and ideas of

government.

Nancy Lenkeith has most recently dealt

with this much-treated subject. So close

were the ties between mother church and

mother city that “if Rome were destroyed,

the physical basis of the legitimacy of both popes and emperors would be lost

altogether: if its power grew out of control, popes and emperors might lose their claim to the city. Hence the hostility of a population

which found itself thwarted every time it tried to do what Milan, Florence, and the

others were doing.” 326 The dependence of religious priority and authority on the

occupation of a particular piece of ground,

even if that ground is Jerusalem itself, has no place in a church that is led from heaven. In the case of Rome it becomes a fanatical

obsession. Chrysostom, totally at a loss for any sure and reliable principle of authority on which to refute the heretics, finally falls back on the ultimate argument: we must

assume and teach, he says, that whatever

church holds possession of the holy places is the true church. True, he says, some protest that we hold those places by force—with the

air of imperial arms—but it is unthinkable

that God should allow the holy places to

remain in the hands of heretics. In the end

this remains for Chrysostom the one and only sure and simple argument that can convince

the world of the truth of the church to which he adheres. It was not very long before those holy places were to fall into the hands of the Muslims.

Competing claims of power. It was only by the authority of civil claims that it was possible to set Constantinople up as a

“Second Rome,” holier even than the first.

Had the claims of Rome been purely

apostolic, there could have been no thought

of duplicating them at will simply by

establishing another city to resemble old

Rome. The city has become the foundation of

general authority in the church, in recognition of the historic fact that now this city and now that city is in very truth the queen of the

world, the mother city—metropolis. The city

that ruled the world was the city that could, as a matter of course, claim to be the head of the church, and in turn Antioch, Rome,

Milan, and Constantinople put forth the claim

and exercised the power in reality.

Constantinople counted for “more than

Rome, more than any of the centers of the

ancient Oriental monarchies,” writes N.

Iorga. 327 “Constantinople was always a sort of Kremlin.” 328 By the dedication of Constantinople on 17 May 330, writes

Andreas Alföldi, Constantine “gave his

Christian organization of the state a centre free from any touch of paganism.” 329 The emblems on his coins show that “the new

capital is the ideal centre of Christian

world-empire. On Constantine’s own

confession God appeared to him in a dream

and ordered him to found the new

residence.” 330 Constantinople was to be the Christian Rome because the old Rome was

too pagan. What about its apostolic claims?

If they were being made, they certainly bore no great weight. “When Constantinople

openly became the ideal centre of the

Christian Empire, Rome, the old capital, renounced by the Emperor, was ipso facto bound to be left the citadel of the old

traditions. ”331 And though the old traditions, as Lenkeith has demonstrated, never died

out,332 Constantinople became “the city,”

untainted by paganism, the pure and holy

capital, not only of the church, but of the

world.

To counter the growing power of Milan,

the bishops of Rome lent their support to the rival dioceses of Ravenna and Arles. In

Arles, intrigues resulted in the expulsion of Hero, an excellent bishop; in his place Pope Zosimus supported one Patroclus, who

abused his power and lost it. So did attempts at power politics, featuring active

correspondence with the Gallic bishoprics in attempts to weaken their ties with rivals, all come to an end with the setting up of new

barbarian kingdoms in which “the court of

the king became the center of ecclesiastical affairs as of all others.” 333 This, as we have seen, is no new system invented by

barbarians. Rome was remarkably

uninterested in the local rituals and liturgies that sprung up everywhere on the Oriental-Milanese pattern. Even when asked for

instructions, the popes showed little interest in prescribing their own form of the Mass.

Nowhere does the rise of national churches

appear as a threat or challenge, let alone an insult, to Rome. In dealing with rival cities, however, it was, as it had always been,

another matter. The city that could not sleep until Carthage, Corinth, Veii, etc., were

leveled to the ground was not lightly to be

challenged by anyone. But as far as religion was concerned, other cities had equal or

better claims.

Throughout the Middle Ages, Rome

bitterly resented the existence of Jerusalem

with its undeniable claim to be the Holy City, the exact center of the earth, the

supreme hierocentric point where the cross

of redemption stood over the exact spot

where Adam’s skull lay buried, and where

the holy sepulchre stood at the pivotal point not only of the earth but of the universe.

Jerusalem was the one supreme goal of

every pilgrim, the place of the life, death, resurrection, and ascension of the Lord, the mount of the Lord’s house and site of the

sacrifice of Isaac, the home of the apostles, etc. And how Rome hated Constantinople!

Constantinople is for Claudian the altera Rome, the false copy of the true Rome,

which it has basely forced into second place.

Why does Claudian take this so to heart? Not for the sake of the apostles, certainly, but because he idolizes pagan Romanites and

their pietas [devotion to the gods, to the family, and to the state]—it is not as a

Christian but as a proud citizen of the city of Rome that he boils with resentment against

the new upstarts and feels within every fiber of his being that Rome and Rome alone

should rule the world— and the church.

When a barbarian king writes to the

bishop of Rome for help, he does not appeal

to him as Peter’s successor but simply as the custodian of “the laws of Rome and of

Caesar.” 334 For shame, cries the pope. You should have referred to the laws of God

instead, “for you are truly God’s vicar in the kingdom by the side of his royal prophet… .

Try to be able to rule with him in eternity, whose vicar you are in the reign that is

foretold.” 335 The good king’s ignorance of the status of Rome is no more striking than

the bishop’s designation of the king as vicar and coruler with God.

The Fight for Power

As soon as the “rank of churches is determined by the prominence of cities as

civil capitals,” 336 a clash between the rivals for top place is inevitable. Nothing is less surprising than Duchesne’s observation that

“the bishops of the capital did not content

themselves for long with being the

ecclesiastical heads of a single diocese.” 337

Could one expect anything else of human

nature?

When the episcopal seat became the

highest office in the city, it became at that moment the goal of the ambitious and the

unscrupulous; and when it became but a step

to a higher place, the rivalry and the

bitterness among the top cities knew no

bounds. Examples are legion. “It is not the

priestly office that is to blame,” writes

Chrysostom, commenting on the culmination

of the evil in his time, but those who abuse it, as every intelligent person admits.338 Yet

we go right on electing unqualified men so that “in our day it has reached the point

where, unless God very quickly snatches us

from the danger and saves us and his church

[all will be lost]. Pray tell me, where do you think all these riots come from that now fill the churches? From nothing in the world but

the false teachings of those at the head, and from these haphazard and uncontrolled

elections.” 339 All this corruption comes from the head: if the head is sick, of course the whole body will suffer. “Some are actually

filling the churches with murder, leading

whole cities to riot and revolt, all because they are fighting [to get themselves elected bishops]. ”340 A more disastrous lack of central control in the church could hardly be imagined.

This passage gives us a glimpse of an

important phenomenon that can be

documented at enormous length, that is, the

mass participation of the city mobs in the affairs of the church, usually centering

around the person of the bishop. Since the

destruction of the old monarchies in the great revolutions of the eighth century B.C., the

Mediterranean world had been governed by

men whose claims to the right to rule had to rest on trickery, force, and flattery. Tyrants were a necessary evil, democracies another.

Authority rests on the will of heaven, but

how was that will to be determined when the

principle of royal priestly succession had

been abolished for the state? The authority of the Pythian oracle became enormous. The

traveling sophos, a great and disinterested

spirit endowed with divine perspicacity and

ever seeking knowledge, became the ultimate

advisor to the nations, who humbly sought

his services. But still there was nothing hard and fast to go by, and so stasis became the

chronic and fatal malady of the ancient

world. A knack and tendency for taking sides and slugging it out on all issues filled all the cities of late antiquity with constant riot and disorder—some of it of a ritual nature, some of it recognized as a necessary evil, and all of it disquieting to the point of driving men wild with a desire for ataraxia, and willing to pay any price to get it. When the church

became the world church, it did not put an

end to these disorders: under the direction of church leaders, stasis, faction, and rioting (like public oratory) took a new lease on

life. The Christians had been in imperial

favor for the first time for hardly more than a week when Christian mobs, urged on by

clergy, fell upon each other in the streets of all the great cities with a savagery and

abandon which scandalized and scared the

pagans and drove the emperor to bed with

sick headaches. A fierce partisan spirit has been the breath of life to the clergy ever

since.

In the time of the apostolic fathers we meet everywhere with “fierce, loathsome, riotous

sedition” within the Christian

communities.341 The object of their warfare is the support of rival candidates to the

office of bishop. This had in every century

been the principal cause of trouble in the

Christian church. This is because the office of bishop, unlike that of an apostle or of any general authority, is an elective one. To be a bishop, one must gain the support of the

multitude and that multitude must outshout the opposition, for the bishops were elected

after the old pagan pattern of the acclamatio.

If the episcopal office was not originally a political one, it could not be anything else once it became the gift of popular election.

One can think of nothing less “apostolic”

than such a state of things. In recent years defenders of the faith have loudly declared

the monarchical and undemocratic nature of church office—but to recognize that this

should be the nature of church office is a far cry from proving that it has been such

through the years.

In Search of a General Authority

The burning question in the time of the

apostolic fathers was, Who is in charge

around here? No one, including the apostolic fathers themselves, knew the answer. In their days, the churches were writing letters to

each other to be read and considered and

then handed on: the bishop of Smyrna writes

to the church at Philippi; the bishop of

Antioch does the same, also sending letters

of advice and council to churches at Tralles, Ephesus, Rome, Philadelphia, and Magnesia

—explaining that he has no right to give

orders but finds himself unable to keep

silence in the face of the way things are

going. Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons, gives Victor of Rome a severe dressing-down in

the Easter controversy—and Victor backs

down; “the church sojourning at Rome”

sends an opinion to “the church sojourning in Corinth” because the latter has asked for it but boasts that it has received apostolic

instruction by a visit from Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna, who came to Rome to correct

some false ideas of Anicetus, the bishop

there.342 None of these advisors sets himself up as an authority or a superior and, what is more significant, none of them, though

desperately pressed for leadership, knows of any higher authority to which he can

recommend those whom he is instructing.

The perfect equality of the bishops is evident enough, but it is also repeatedly stated as a basic principle.

In all the lively interchange of letters and ideas between the bishops of the third

century, the church at Rome “naturally” has a place of prime importance, Hugo Koch

notes; 343 but in all this correspondence

“there is always expressed the

consciousness of the equality of all churches and bishops, and when their opinion differs

from that of Rome they do not change it. ”344

It was inevitable that certain bishops should from very early times have claimed superior

ratings, and Tertullian pours withering

contempt on the one “who calls himself the

bishop of bishops,” 345 and later Cyprian says

“we recognize no bishop of bishops.” 346 The church of the third century, says Koch,

believed that Matthew 16:18 proclaimed the

authority of the episcopal office, but not of any one superbishop. 347 When a bishop visits another church, according to the

Apostolic Constitution, he must sit beside the bishop of that church, “sharing with him the same identical honor; and he shall be

asked to address the people with words of instruction. If he modestly refuses, he shall be forced. ”348 This is to emphasize the absolute equality of bishops. The concluding speech of the great Council of Nicaea was an appeal by the emperor to the bishops to

remember a thing which they had forgotten,

that “the decision of which bishop is really superior to another must rest with God. You

must yield gracefully to each other,” says

Constantine, “and so avoid all this terrible dissension.” 349 For it was nothing but fighting among the bishops for places of

superior power—a fight in which doctrinal

issues served, as all well knew, only as

pretexts. This fight had brought on the need for the emperor’s intervention and the calling of the council in the first place. The

emperor’s word was not enough to stem the

tide of human nature, and, not long

afterwards, he wrote in a general epistle

words of stunning rebuke with the refrain

“According to God’s law, bishops must be

equal!” 350

Campaigns and intrigue. But it was

precisely because bishops were equal that

the office of bishop could not solve the

problem of leadership after the passing of

the apostles: when equals disagree, who is

to decide? Ignatius’s remarkable silence on

the matter of even local councils has been

noted. The idea that if one can only get

enough bishops to agree on a thing their

opinion must be God’s opinion became an

obsession after Nicaea: whether 80 or 250

of 381 bishops signed a document made all

the difference in the world. Number was

everything—as it would not have been had

the church enjoyed the leadership of a

general authority. Within a province, the

archbishop’s word was final, but what if

provinces disagreed? Who would judge

among the metropolitans? Into this gap stepped the emperor—reluctantly but

perforce, with no one dissenting. “When

there were differences among the various

provinces,” says Eusebius, “acting as a

common bishop appointed by God, he [the

emperor] would summon synods of the

ministers of God.” 351 God had appointed bishops, and he had also appointed a

common bishop over them all—where was

he now, if the emperor had to take his place?

“He [the emperor] did not disdain to sit in

the midst of such assemblies,” Eusebius

continues, “and share their deliberations,

being the common arbiter of their episcopal

affairs… . He sat in their midst as one of

their number, entirely without armed

retainers.” 352 So at last the church had a general authority. Of all the men who ever

lived, only Constantine was qualified, it is Eusebius’s firm conviction, to call the great

general Council of Nicaea—the first general conference of the church to be held in over

250 years—and that during a time when such

a general council was desperately needed!

“Quite rightly he observed once at a meeting of bishops that he too was a bishop… . As I

remember it, he said, ‘As you being set over the internal affairs of the church, so I as

having been set by God over its external

affairs, may well be called episcopus.’ And indeed he was a true episcopus to all his subjects.” 353 Recently, Roman Catholic scholars, aware of the grave implications of such a statement, have attempted to give it a special interpretation, but from the preceding passages the interpretation is only too

obvious.

Shortly after, Hilary, writing to fellow

bishops in Gaul, uses language that

completely confirms the obvious meaning of

Eusebius’s account. Seeing the state of

things, Hilary says that he, like the apostolic fathers of old, “cannot keep silence.” “But it is necessary for me and religiously proper, I believe, to act as if I were a bishop of

bishops sending out letters” to all who have written to me, asking me questions though I

am most unlearned and inexperienced.354 But he knows of no higher head to pass the

letters on to, and so, like Constantine,

reluctantly tries to fill the place of a general authority that no longer exists. It is

interesting that Roman Catholic authorities, resting their whole claim on what they loudly describe as an unbroken chain of authority,

when confronted with no end of missing

links, rotten links, and rival links in the

chain, blandly and piously announce that it

makes no difference how broken the chain or

dubious the record, since “the office always remained.” 355 Their proof of the divinity of the office is an unbroken chain; their only

proof of the unbroken chain is the divinity of the office. By the closest possible

translation, Constantine says to the bishops:

“But you over the internal affairs of the

church, I over the external by God have been installed may be considered a bishop.” 356

There is no doubt that the external affairs of the church are the proper sphere for the

general authorities. “Every orthodox writer

was fiercely conscious of the need for the

unity of all Christians in the Church

universal,” writes John Morris of the second century, “however bitterly he might resist the claims of … any … given centre to exercise

the authority of that universal Church.” 357 All recognized that the church should have

general authorities, but nobody knew for sure where to find them.

We need not repeat here the story of the

fights between the great city bishoprics,

fights for power and mastery in which

nothing was barred. It was this as much as anything that disgusted honest people

everywhere and sent hordes of Christians to

seek refuge from Christian society in

monastic isolation. “Not all bishops are

bishops,” says Jerome in defense of the

monks. “Ecclesiastic dignity does not make a Christian.” 358 “Christ called fishermen and tent makers and tax collectors to this

supreme authority,” wrote Chrysostom, “but

the present clergy simply spit on those who

earn their living by daily toil; whereas if

someone is devoted to worldly studies,

avoids hard work, etc., they receive him

with open arms and admiration. Why is it

that they pass right by those who have toiled and sweated all their days for the upbuilding of the church to give all the highest church offices to somebody who had never raised a

finger to do any work but wasted all his time dabbling in useless, ornamental, worldly

learning? ”359 Certainly no one can accuse Chrysostom, as many have tried to accuse

Tertullian, of sour grapes—for no one held a higher office in the church than he, though it kept him in an official world of constant and dangerous intrigue.

The real issue at Nicaea. The letters in Patrologiae Latinae 13:583–88 show that in the West and in the East the Arian

controversy was merely an aspect of the

great struggle for episcopal priority. It is not a contest between theologians but between

bishops, and the issue is not doctrine but

power. It is only proper that in every case it is the emperor alone who is responsible for

the final decision and solution, and that

bishop is strongest who has the emperor’s

ear. St. Basil was saddened to see the great bishops fighting fiercely among themselves:

“Without any cause at all the greatest of the churches have fallen out of their ancient

bonds of brotherhood.” 360 For all of Basil’s

“without cause,” there nevertheless had to be a cause, an obvious cause, for the rivalry

among the bishops. It is plain from his

remark that the cause was not an open and

admitted one (such characteristic naïveté).

The cause was not doctrine, but it was not

and is not hard to find: jealousy and

ambition. It fairly shrieks at one in almost every episcopal cause, though no bishop

could afford to admit it, yet all betray it in almost every letter they write. Was the nature of the Trinity the real issue at Nicaea? Not for a moment! This is a very trivial technical question, the emperor wrote; no one

understands it, and it contributes nothing to the salvation of men. It may be a good thing for the experts to sharpen their wits by

discussing such exquisitely refined and

impractical things, but they should keep their discussions closely confined to their own

company. When they get out into the public they only cause trouble, and what the experts themselves fight about because they cannot

understand can only be a double perplexity

to the laymen, who moreover welcome a

good pretext for taking sides and stirring up trouble. The philosophers talk on and on

about such things in their endless

disputations, but they at least quarrel like gentlemen and get along with each other very well for all their technical differences. But you who call yourselves ministers of God

and a holy brotherhood act like spiteful and vicious children; these recondite and

unsearchable matters are nothing but a

pretext for venting your spite against each

other.361 So wrote the emperor, and the words and behavior of the churchmen

support his charge to the fullest.

“This Alexander,” Bishop Eusebius of

Nicodemia wrote to as many bishops as

would read and subscribe to his letter,

“thinks the whole world depends on his nod.

The nature of the Godhead is for him merely

a pretext to gain power—he has been

working against us for years. Don’t have

anything to do with him. If you meet any of

his supporters in the street, look the other way—do not defile yourselves by wishing

them a good day.” 362 In reply to such sentiments, Alexander spills the beans: “This Eusebius is all ambition. When he saw an

opening in Nicodemia he pulled wires until

he long suffered his insolent attacks and

diplomatic intrigues against us in silence.

This is the last straw. We anathemize anyone who has anything to do with him.” 363 At the opening session of the Nicene Council,

while all were waiting for latecomers the

emperor presided at the burning of a

mountain of letters that had been submitted to him by the clergy from all over the world

during the days when the council was being prepared. This huge pile of documents

consisted almost entirely of charges by

various churchmen against each other. 364

At Nicaea the emperor assigned all seats,

and there was no funny business. The

precaution was a necessary one, for when

the bishops came together at later synods, the more ambitious ones insisted on taking

higher places than the others. Basil reports that the Oriental bishops complained

“because the Roman bishops took exalted

seats in the presence of their legates”—the

master whose example they were following

was a cosmocrator whom no one could ever accuse of being meek and lowly. 365

Resultant pride. The growing arrogance of the clergy throughout the early centuries is only too well documented. The fifty years of peace between the Decian and Diocletian

persecutions fostered the worst vices in the

church, vices which the brief (two-year) Decian persecution had only interrupted.

“Not even in particular instances,” writes

Milner, “can we discover, during the same

interval, much of any very lively

Christianity.” 366 The corruption was general and universal. Again the Diocletian

persecution did not eradicate but only

arrested the evil for a short time. On the eve of that persecution when the church was

blossoming under imperial favor, Eusebius

tells how “some that appeared to be our

pastors, deserting the law of piety, were

inflamed against each other with mutual

strifes, only accumulating quarrels and

threats, rivalry, hostility, and hatred to each other, only anxious to assert the government as a kind of sovereignty for themselves. ”367

Even during the brief pause in the midst of

the Diocletian persecution, the clergy

showed that they had learned nothing and

forgotten nothing:

But the events that occurred in the

intermediate time, besides those already

related, I have thought proper to pass by; I mean particularly the circumstances of the

different heads of the churches, who from

being shepherds of the reasonable flocks of

Christ … did not govern in a lawful and

becoming manner… . [There were]

ambitious aspirings of many to office, …

great schisms and difficulties industriously fomented by the factions among the new

members, against the relics of the church,

devising one innovation after another. 368

But it was in the warm sun of imperial favor that all the worst that envy and ambition

could contrive came to the fore. Many a

father has commented on this phenomenon as

a truism of church history: prosperity means ruin for the church. Less familiar to students than the arrogant claims and charges of the

bishops of the fourth and fifth centuries are

those official pronouncements of successive synods in which the bishops proclaim

themselves to be above all human laws and

from that thesis develop corollary powers

whose arrogance knows no bounds.

The Glories (and Duties?) of a Bishop

We have seen the apostolic fathers casting

about for a formula to fix the authority and tenure of bishops—and not finding it. They

describe a complete breakdown of respect

for authority in the churches, brought about by fights between factions and individuals

trying for the office of bishop. All they can do is to insist over and over again that

obedience to the bishop and presbyters is the duty of the members, appealing to them in the name of sophia [wisdom] and good sense to forget their squabbles. They did not forget

them, and insistence on obedience to the

bishop became a familiar refrain capable of

many variations. And whereas the apostolic fathers emphasized the obligations and duties of bishops, priests, and deacons toward each other and the community with only incidental mention of the obligations and duties of the congregations as a whole, succeeding

churchmen emphasized more and more the

duties of the people to the clergy, especially the bishop, and less and less the clergy’s,

and particularly the bishop’s, duties to

others.

From duty to privilege. In the 127 Canons we still meet the old spirit: the bishop,

priest, or deacon guilty of fornication, false oath, or theft shall be deposed, but not

excommunicated, since the scripture says

“Do not punish twice for the same

offense.” 369 A neat bit of sophistry in favor of the clergy—but at least they have some

responsibilities. Further, any bishop, priest, or deacon who strikes or curses an

unbeliever or a guilty believer with the intent of inspiring fear thereby shall be deposed.

“For nowhere did the Lord teach us to act

thus; on the contrary, he supported blows

with patience.” 370 Such a rule is unthinkable in later centuries. But among the clergy, the bishop had all priority, and “any cleric who opposes a bishop in anything must be

deposed with all his followers, as having

attempted to seize power: he is a rebel. All the laymen who follow him must be

excommunicated.” 371 This clearly reflects the great fear of independent movements

which has always haunted a church unsure of

its authority.

Among the many rules on dispossessed

clergy (especially bishops) collected in the tenth volume of Patrologiae Graecae are many old ones. From the frequent mention of

dispossession of bishops, conspiracy against bishops, and revolts and accusations against

bishops, one feels the insecurity of an elected office under the control of city mobs.

To this day the pope may not excommunicate

the citizens of the city of Rome—for they

gave him his office: by virtue of them he is bishop, and by virtue of being bishop of that city he is pope. The advice to bishops in

case of deposition, loss of property, or

expulsion is significant: “Blessed are they

who suffer persecution for the sake of

justice.” 372

In the third century magnificent bishops

begin to assert themselves. Paul of

Samosata373 was not condemned by his fellow bishops for his theatrical throne, his host of concubines, his hired claque, his

wholesale bribery, his scarlet robes, etc., but only for a technical point of doctrine. When Origen discoursed before a number of

bishops gathered for a conference in

Jerusalem, the cry went up. “Such a thing has

never been heard of, that laymen should give a speech in the presence of a bishop! ”374 The widening gap between the ideal and the fact

is plain in Origen’s enthusiastic comparison of the Christian way with the pagan way:

“We do not accept or tolerate those

ambitious for power, who would force those

who do not want to receive the common

opinion of the church. Our good leaders are

under the sway of the king, who we believe

is the Son of God,” and everyone willingly

does his share in the church for the salvation of mankind. Thus they are ruled by the word

of God, and thus they achieve perfect unity, wisdom, truth, and justice. 375 Such was the ideal—by the fourth century the church was

so afflicted by those vices of which Origen

declared it to be free in his day that by the testimony of all Christian writers of the time, her condition was far worse than that of the pagans. What was missing more than

anything else was humility.

Authority as a shield. Nothing could have been easier or more inevitable than to apply the supernatural claims for the source of a bishop’s authority to every expression of that authority. The heathen Romans had long

drilled the world in the useful equations:

victory = superior power, superior power =

divine power, divine power = divine

authority, divine authority = divine office, divine office = divine officer; opposition to such can only be opposition to God,

blasphemy, the sum and epitome of all that is vicious, depraved, and deserving of no other fate than extermination. With these

convenient formulas constantly before them

in the symbolism and the standards of the

empire, it would be strange if Christian

Romans did not assume the divine calling of

the bishop to mean divine power and

authority in all that he did. The ultimate in

extravagant drawing out of this supersyllogism was to become the reasoning,

already refuted by Tertullian,376 that because Christ gave a promise to Peter, the bishop

(an office not mentioned) of a city not

mentioned holds all the power in the world!

This is a triumph of Roman thought—of the

imperial age.

“The bishop possesses the highest

authority on earth,” says the Apostolic

Constitutions, “representing the type of God among men, holding the rule of all men,

priests, kings, princes, fathers, sons,

teachers, and of all subjects alike.” The

proof? “Because to you he said ‘what you

bind on earth shall be bound in heaven.’ ” 377

Who then shall judge a bishop if he does

wrong? None but the bishop himself; let him

follow the admonition to “Know thyself.” 378

What greater sin can there be than to say

anything against a bishop “through whom the

Lord has given the Holy Spirit through the laying on of hands: through whom you have

learned the holy doctrine; through whom you

know God; through whom you have believed

on Christ; … by whom you have been sealed

with the oil of exultation and the salve of

intelligence; through whom you have become

sons of light”; through whom you have been

baptized and God has adopted you? “Cherish

the one who is your father next to God and

reverence him.” 379 The author here lists all the spiritual functions of a bishop that he can think of, generously expanding the list with rhetorical padding. The actual functions of a bishop boil down to baptizing and the laying on of hands. But according to modern

Catholic doctrine, anyone can baptize. What

does that leave the bishop? The Christians

must turn over their money to the bishop,

says the same source, and never question

what he does with it. He is answerable to

God alone. “Judge not the bishop nor the lay congregation.” 380 The injunction to “judge not” is soon to be confined to judgments

against clergy—a very convenient

specialization. The Apostolic Constitutions make sharp distinctions between crimes

deserving of crucifixion, stoning, fines,

whipping, etc., and between crimes against

kings, rulers, and equals, and finally the

worst of all, crimes against God, priest, and temple. “It is not allowed to expose either a king or a priest… . He who affronts kings is worthy of punishment, even though it be a

son or a friend; of how much greater

punishment is he deserving who affronts

priests?” 381 If sedition in the state is bad, how much worse is sedition in the church?

This “how-much-more” device is a well-

worn and surefire rhetorical trick by which

any merit or offense can be magnified or

minimized by any desired degree. It is a

favorite implement for exalting the priesthood and the teaching profession. If

one loves one’s physical parents, how much more should one love one’s spiritual parents? If it is a crime to abuse one’s father, how much greater a crime to affront one’s

heavenly father? It is effective even when

used in utterly meaningless contexts: If one should be praised for singing, how much

more should one be praised for dancing? If

bank robbery is reprehensible, how much

more reprehensible should ice skating be?

Declarations attributed to early bishops of

Rome that strengthened the hand of the pope

all follow the same pattern. “Bishops are to be judged by God,” not by men. They are

above all human law. 382 “Laymen are not to be heard if they bring charges [against

bishops]. ”383 The bishop has the deacons to act as his eyes and ears, spying out any cases of defection or seditious talk against him—

they are his personal agents to keep an eye on his personal enemies. “No bishop may be

refuted or accused of anything by the people or by vulgar persons.” 384 “Anyone who says a word against [a bishop], the eyes of the

Lord, is guilty of the crime of lèse-

majesté… . Those who accuse bishops are slain not by human but by divine agency. ”385

“There is no worse crime than to bring a

charge against a priest. The priest may be

guilty, but even so, he must be left entirely to the judgment of God. For if all crimes are to be punished in this world, there will be

nothing left for the exercise of divine

judgment!” 386 This shocking bit of sophistry, it will be noted, guarantees the immunity of priests only—to others it does not apply.

All charges against a bishop should be

kept secret and referred to the same bishop.

No matter what his final decision is, the

business should go no further. 387 Even the

basic rule nemo de se ipso judicet [no one should judge concerning himself] is

abrogated in the need for endowing the

bishop with divine authority. “[The bishops]

who with their own mouths confect the body

of the Lord are to be heard, obeyed, and

feared by all.” 388 “The populace is to be taught and dominated by [the bishop], not

[he] by it.” 389 It is equally wicked to speak against a bishop or to allow another to do

so… . It is not only against divine laws but against human, which also prohibit a

master. 390 “The populace shall not reprimand its pastor. Bishops are to be judged only by God, who had chosen them as his eyes. ”391

At this point the text negates the report that the church is full of contentions and

aemilationes [flatteries] and that the saints of God who are to judge the world are full of evil: “Anyone who kills his wife,” a letter of Pius I avers, “and does so entirely without

reason must do public penance; but if he is disobedient toward a bishop, let him be

anathemized.” 392 “The king received his title of Rex not from regno, ‘rule,’ ” says the haughty Eleutherius to one “Lucius King of

Britain,” “but from regendo—‘to be ruled,’ ”

namely, by the clergy. 393

From immunity to power. “Priesthood is to be more held in awe today than in the days of the ancient law,” says Chrysostom. “Our

power and dignity is simply

overwhelming.” 394 It is a power so great that there is danger in possessing it; it is such a power as can only be exercised by wise

men. Wisely, he pleads for an awakening

sense of responsibility among the priesthood, and to ensure its proper exercise he

recommends thorough training in oratory and

dialectic!395 “The minister of holy things must be just and pure as if he were acting

amidst such powers and standing in heaven

itself.” 396 The claims to possession of boundless power, glory, and sanctity which

Chrysostom puts forth are gladly accepted by the priests of all ages—the accompanying

responsibility is rejected out of hand by

arguments of simple sophistry.

“I am called a tyrant and worse than a

tyrant,” 397 says Ambrose, who ruled the church with a power never exercised by any

Roman bishop of his century, but he will not tolerate criticism from the emperor: “When

did you ever hear, most gentle emperor, of

laymen passing judgment on a bishop in a

cause fidei [of faith]? … If a bishop is to be taught by a layman, what will be the end of

it? Let the layman dispute and the bishop

listen—a bishop taught by a layman!! ”398

“Who would not deny that in matters of the

faith bishops should be judged by emperors,

and not emperors by bishops?” 399 “Your father, an older man than you, said, ‘It is not

for me to judge among bishops,’ but you say

‘I must judge.’ ” 400 “People say, ‘Ambrose wants to have more power than the emperor.’

”401 They must have had a reason. “The emperor,” Ambrose insists, “is in the church, not over the church.” 402 Who is then?

Accordingly, “the monarch was seated

below the rails of the sanctuary and

confounded with the rest of the faithful

multitude” in the church, while Ambrose sat

on the throne. It had been just the opposite under Constantine, where all the bishops of

united Christendom were pleased to remain

standing until the emperor, himself sitting, nodded for them to be seated. This was a

personal campaign undertaken by Ambrose

—who admitted that it had all tongues

wagging. At the very same time, for example, the African bishops insisted that Macarius,

the emperor’s military prefect, be allowed to sit in church apart from the multitude and on

a level with the bishop. Speaking of the trial and deposition of a lapsed bishop, Optatus

writes: “This is a supreme sacrilege. God

reserves the right to judge his own, yet you insist on rushing in everywhere into things

that are not your business, spoiling all

pleasure. For what greater ruin of pleasure

could there be for priests of God than to live as less than they were?” 403 Even if it is their fault, their office should now put them above all examination. It is a priest speaking. Of the great massacres of Donatists, he writes: We are not responsible for the way the

military broke up the Donatists, urging all to unity. True, it was armed with special letters from the bishops that the commander

Taurinus carried out great slaughter, but what do you do against a lot of fanatics? They had actually made the roads unsafe for bishops’

carriages. 404 To the emperor, Lucifer writes:

“What power have you, a profane person,

over the priestly authority of the Highest God?” (Again the convenient identification

of the source of the power with its extent—

as if a second lieutenant, being

commissioned by the president of the United

States, could thereby claim all the powers of the president.)405 “How can you dare to say that you can pass judgment on bishops, when

by disobeying them you incur the death

penalty as having insulted God himself?” 406

“Who are you,” cries Lucifer, “to usurp this authority, which God did not give you?” 407

And even if he did give it, it was only on

condition that you belong to the right church.

In the rivalry between civil and

ecclesiastical power the priests are the only proper judges—are they not appointed by

God? And they award the crown to

themselves—are they not appointed by God?

And any who withhold complete,

unquestioning, and absolute submission are

antichrist—for are they not appointed by God? But who says they are appointed by

God? Who else has the right to say it but they themselves—for are they not appointed by

God? The circular argument is the essence of sectarian authority. “How could any man

who writes against the Christians do

anything but lie?” says Origen, 408 using an argument that had been employed long before

by Cicero, an argument to which there is but one answer: “If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true” (John 5:31). “Prove that you have been made judge over us, however

necessary such a judge may be… . You

cannot prove not only that you have the right to rule bishops, but you cannot prove that

bishops are not supposed to rule you, nay,

and that if you disobey them you are not

thereby judged worthy of death! ”409

As might be expected, the same charges

were brought against Lucifer as against

Ambrose: Why do you call me arrogant, he asks, why do you call me proud,

contumelious? Did not the ancient prophets

denounce wickedness? In the end his

authority is the Old Testament, but anyone

can use that. Lucifer keeps asking: if the

ancient prophets and patriarchs could speak

and act thus freely, why should not we?410

The answer is easy: They were prophets and patriarchs, the kind that God chooses when

he will, and they are rare indeed; but priests appear in every age in droves and in armies

—a totally different type of being, falling

back for the justification of all their plans and ambitions on their own private

interpretations of the scriptures, which they categorically forbid others to interpret

without their aid. Lucifer, for example, loves to compare himself with the apostles, 411

though he was no more able to pass the test

than were the priests of Rome whom

Tertullian denounced. 412 Ambrose calls Lucifer the most inspired voice of his time, and Optatus was for the Oxford movement

the most authoritative statement of the claims of the priesthood. Down through the

centuries bishops continued to lecture

emperors on authority. The patriarch, says

the pious Constantine Porphyrogentius to his son, “is an emperor [ basileus], who must provide peace and prosperity just like the

emperor himself.” 413

A saga of struggle over control and

conformity. When bishops insisted on ordaining clergies to dioceses other than

their own, as if they were general

authorities, they were soundly rebuked:

“Who hath enjoined this upon them, or from

what scripture have they been taught

this?” 414 To which they might have rejoined,

“from what scripture do we learn of

metropolitans and archbishops? Who has

enjoined them upon the church?” Once Raoul, archbishop of Canterbury, having

begun Mass and perceiving the king seated

on his throne with the crown on his head,

quitted the altar and advanced to demand

from him the crown on his head, which he

made him take off; but the barons by their

exertions compelled him to replace it. It was a rare archbishop who was satisfied with

spiritual supremacy alone.

The aspirations of bishops to temporal

power can be clearly traced through the

synods they held from time to time. The

Council of Cirta in 305 had to decide what

should be done about those bishops who had

been traditores (Christians who gave

officers of the law scriptures and other

sacred items) during the persecutions. The

president of the council was Bishop

Secundus of Tigisium “because he was the

oldest of the eleven bishops present. ”415 All

the bishops confessed to having given up their copies of the scriptures when

Diocletian’s agents asked for them, each

excusing himself on one ground or another.

When Purpurius, bishop of Limata, pointedly

asked Secundus: “What did you do when the

curstor [inquisitor] asked for your

books?” 416 the good bishop turned to the assembly for advice. It was proposed

thereupon that “every man be accountable to

God only for his conduct in this matter

(whether or not they gave up their copies of the scriptures).” 417 This convenient solution was passed unanimously with cries of Deo Gratias.

In 314 the Council of Arles passed a rule

that “no bishop should annoy another

bishop.” 418 This followed hard upon the Council of Ancyra (held in 314 to heal the

troubles attendant upon the persecutions—

especially the problem of the lapsi [lapsed

members]) where it was decreed that

“chorepiskopoi [priestly assistants to the bishop] might not ordain presbyters and

deacons nor city presbyters without

permission of the bishop of the hetera

paroikia [persons under the jurisdiction of another bishop] in writing. ”419 Church property sold during an episcopal vacancy

must be sold back again if the bishop

demands it. 420 Bishops not accepted by the paroikias to which they have been ordained will be cut off if they try to push out another bishop either in their old paroikia or in some other by stirring up trouble. 421 Later ecclesiastical councils determined further

canons of church law and procedure in a

series of efforts to regulate the powers of the bishops:

Neocaesarea, A.D. 314–325

Canon 14. The chorepiskopoi are the type

of the seventy, but in view of the good work they do for the poor, they may have the honor of administering the sacrament. 422

Council of Nicaea, A.D. 325

Canon 4. A bishop must be installed by all

the bishops of his province; if that is not

possible, by at least three bishops, with

written permission from all the others, and in every case under the supervision of the

metropolitan of the eparchy. 423

Canon 5. A person excluded from a church

by the personal rancor of the bishop may

appeal his case before a provincial synod to be held in every province for this specific

purpose twice a year, at Easter and in

autumn. 424

Canon 15. Because of great disorder and

rioting it will be necessary to abolish the old custom of allowing a bishop, priest, or

deacon to move from one city to another. If

any presumes to do this, he shall be sent back to the city in which he was ordained.425

Canon 16. Priests, deacons, or others

living under the canon who frivolously and

irresponsibly leave their churches will be

forced to return to them by all possible

means. If they refuse to return they shall be deposed. If anyone steals a cleric against a bishop’s will and ordains him to serve in his own church, the ordination shall be void. 426

Encaeniis (Antioch), A.D. 341

Canon 3. A priest or deacon who moves

permanently to another place and ignores his bishop’s appeals to return must lose the right to all office; if he goes to work for another bishop he must be punished to the bargain for breaking church law.427

Canon 9. Bishops in every province must

understand that the bishop in the metropolis has charge of the whole province because all

who have business to transact come from all directions to the metropolis.428

Canon 11. Any bishop, priest, or any

churchman at all who dares to go to the

emperor without a letter from his

metropolitan shall be ejected utterly, not only from his church, but from his priesthood… .

If he must go to the emperor it must be with the okay of the metropolitan of the eparchy

or the bishops of the same, and he must bear letters from them. 429 (Add this authority to the metropolitan.)

Canon 16. When a bishop seizes a vacant

seat without the okay of a full synod, he must be deposed, even though the people have

elected him. 430 (The synod becomes more powerful; popular election is going out.)

Canon 18. A bishop who cannot take over

a church because the congregation will not

have him must remain in honor and office but may not meddle in the affairs of the church

where he is forced to remain. 431

Canon 21. No matter what happens, a

bishop must remain forever in the church to

which God has chosen him. 432 (Church control over the bishop tightens.)

Sardika, A.D. 347

Canon 1. No bishop ever moves from a

larger to a smaller city but only in the other direction. 433 (Ambition and domination are being measured always and only by the size

of a city.)

Canon 2. If it can be proven that a man has

bribed parties to stir up a clamor for him as bishop, “so to make it seem that the people

are actually asking him to be their bishop,”

he shall be excommunicated. 434

Canon 6. It is not permitted to ordain a

bishop for a small place. It must be populosa

… quae mereatur habere episcopum

[populous in order to be worthy of having a

bishop]. 435

Epaon, A.D. 517

Canon 3. If the king acts against us, all

bishops will withdraw to monasteries, and

no bishop shall stir out again until the king has given peace to each and all bishops

alike.436

Orleans, A.D. 541

Canon 3. Nobles may not celebrate Easter

at their own oratories but must come to the

episcopal city for the yearly rites. 437

Canon 20. No layman may arrest, question,

or punish a cleric without okay of the church.

When a cleric appears in court, it must be

with okay of his bishop, and no sentence may be passed without the presence of his

spiritual superior. 438

Canon 32. Descendants of church slaves

who have found their way back to the

original place of their ancestors must be

brought back to the church slavery, no matter how long or for how many generations they

have been free. 439

Paris, A.D. 557

Canon 1. No one may hold that church

property changes political dominations: no

one can claim that church property ever

passes under another ruler “since the

dominion of God knows no geographical

boundaries.” No one may claim that he holds

as a gift from the king property that once

belonged to the church. All property given

by King Chlodwig of blessed memory and

handed down as an inheritance must now be

given back to the church. 440

Tours, A.D. 567

Canon 14. All priests and monks must

sleep in dormitories. Two or three men must

remain constantly awake, spelling each other by turns. 441

Canon 15. Whoever enters a monastery may never leave it to marry. If he does, any judge who refuses to excommunicate him

will be himself excommunicated. Anyone

who defends a monk guilty of such

defilement will be excommunicated until the

monk returns to his monastery. 442

Macon, A.D. 585

Canon 15. Whenever a layman meets a

higher cleric, he must bow to him. If both are mounted, the layman must remove his hat. If

the layman alone is mounted, he must

dismount to greet the cleric.443

Auxerre, A.D. 585

Canon 44. A layman who disregards the

admonition of an archpresbyter must be shut

out of the church and punished in accordance with royal decrees.444

Canon 45. Anyone who is lax in observing this rule or does not report an infraction of it to the bishop is excluded from Christian

communion for one year. 445

Toledo, A.D. 589

Canon 20. Many bishops burden their

clerics with intolerable compulsory services and contributions. Clerics thus cruelly

oppressed may complain to the

metropolitan. 446

Canon 21. Judges and secular officials

who assign slaves of the church and the

clergy to public or private tasks will be

excommunicated. 447

Narbonne, A.D. 589

Canon 1. No cleric may wear purple. It is

for princes and not becoming in

churchmen.448

Canon 13. Subdeacons must hold curtains

and doors open for superior clergy. If they

refuse to do so they must pay a fine; lower clergy who refuse must be beaten. 449

Paris, A.D. 614

Canon 9. Any state official who touches

church property or the property of a bishop

after his death is cut off from communion as an assassin of the poor. 450

Canon 14. Whoever deserts a monastery is

excommunicated to the end of his life. 451

Reims, A.D. 624–625

Canon 13. No one, not even a bishop, may

ever sell the property or slaves of the

church. 452 (The church can gain property; it can never lose it.)

Toledo, A.D. 633

Canon 53. Religious persons who are

neither clerics nor monks must be taken

before the bishop of any area in which they

are found at large, given correction, and

enrolled in the clergy or assigned to a monastery.453

Canon 67. Bishops may not free slaves of

the church unless they reimburse the church

out of their private fortunes, and the bishop’s successors can reclaim any thus freed.

Canon 68. A bishop who frees a slave of

the church without reserving the patrocinium

[financial holdings] for the church must give the church two slaves in his place. If the

person freed makes any complaint about the way he was treated while he was a slave, he

must again become a church slave.454

Toledo, A.D. 638

Canon 3. Thank God for the edict of King

Chintila banishing all Jews from Spain, with the order that “only Catholics may live in the land… . Resolved that any future king before mounting the throne should swear an oath not to tolerate the Jewish Unglauben [unbelief]

… . If he breaks this oath, let him be anathema and maranatha [excommunicated]

before God and food for the eternal fire. ”455

Toledo, A.D. 646

Canon 5. Entirely abolishes the

monasterial rights of the vagi [ les vagabonds, wandering heretics].456

Toledo, A.D. 656

Canon 6. Children over ten years of age

may dedicate themselves to the religious life without consulting their parents. When

smaller children are tonsured or given the

religious garment, unless their parents lodge immediate protest, they are bound to the

religious discipline for life.457

Emerita, A.D. 666

Canon 15. It often happens that priests who fall sick blame church slaves for their

condition and torture them out of revenge.

This must cease. 458

Canon 16. Bishops must stop taking more

than their third. They must not take from the church’s third for their private use. 459

Toledo, A.D. 694

Canon 8. Jews must be denied all

religious practice. Their children must be

taken from them at seven years and must

marry Christians. 460

Berghampstead, A.D. 697

Canons 26–28. All unattached persons are to be treated as thieves. All thieves may be killed (by the king) or sold over the sea.461

Rome, A.D. 743

Canon 3. Clerics may never wear worldly

clothing. 462

Boniface, A.D. 745

Statute 13. Pasquil [jokes about the

authorities] must be severely punished, even

with exile.463

Paderborn, A.D. 785

Canon 21. Anyone engaging in pagan rites

must pay a heavy fine. If he cannot pay, no

matter what his station, he becomes a slave

of the church until he has paid up. 464

Canon 23. Soothsayers and fortune-tellers

shall be given to churches and priests as

slaves. 465

Canon 34. No public assemblies of the

Saxon are permitted without special royal

permission. The priests shall keep watch that this is carried out. 466

Aix-la-Chapelle, A.D. 789

Canon 77. False writing, such as those

claimed to have fallen last year from heaven, must not be read but must be burnt. 467

Clermont, A.D. 1095

Canon 1. Monks, clerics, women, and their

escorts shall enjoy the peace of God every day. Others may be attacked without

breaking the peace Monday through

Wednesday. Full immunity for farmers and

merchants is to be effective three years

“because of the present food shortage. ”468

Lateran IV, A.D. 1215

Canon 3. All condemned heretics must be turned over to the secular authorities for

punishment… . Their property must be

confiscated by the church. Those who have

not been able to clear themselves of charges of heresy are excommunicated and must be

avoided by all. If they remain a year under

the ban, they must be condemned as heretics.

All civil officers must take a public oath to defend the faith and expel from their

territories all heretics. Whoever, when

ordered to do so by the church, does not

purify his district or domain of heretics will

be put under the ban. If he does not give satisfaction within a year, he must be

reported to the pope, who will absolve his

vassals from all duty to him and declare his lands open to legitimate conquest by

Catholics: those who participate in the attack will receive the same privileges as regular

crusaders. All who help, protect, or believe heretics are excommunicated, and if they do

not give satisfaction within a year will lose all legal rights (a horrible list follows); all who associate with them will suffer the

same. Anyone who preaches without the

authorization of a bishop is

excommunicated… . A bishop must inspect

his diocese. His officers are authorized to

have all inhabitants swear an oath to expose to the bishop all sectarians that can be

discovered… . Anyone who refuses to take

the oath automatically makes himself a

traitor. Also any bishop who is lax in these

things is to be deposed. 469

In all this the tendency to compel and

control is clear, and in our day familiar. The missionaries in central and northern Europe

appear as the advance guard of an army of

occupation. The clergy asserts complete

control of civil government, private life, and family. The third canon of the Council of the Lateran is pure McCarthyism without the

crippling fifth amendment that McCarthy

finds so frustrating. There is the guilt by

association which makes all nonconformity

equally criminal. If the clergy was

increasingly presumptuous and tyrannous, the clergy itself became more and more the

victim of its own paralyzing limitations. No one trusts anyone anymore; there is no

release in being a clergyman—all are being

watched. As in the empire, where all things

were solved by absolute subservience to one

man, so in the church—with the paradoxical

result that the one man in whom all the power and authority on earth resided was the most pitiful and insecure object imaginable.

The hysterical insistence on complete

submission and the pathological fear of

conformity are the fruits of a thousand years of Christian rule. Nothing could be feebler

than the stock explanations of “barbaric

Europe” refusing to be measured by the

civilizing offices of the church. The church itself was the mother and teacher of

barbarism. The passion to possess and

control, the insane jealousy of all that lies beyond complete domination, are the

hallmarks of the great khans of Asia (who

were the contemporaries of Innocent III) and the very essence of barbarism. One sees in

the domination of Europe what Richard

Coudenhove-Kalergi, the leader of Roman

Catholic intellectuals on the continent

between the two world wars, meant in his

declaration that “Catholicism is the fascist form of Christianity of which Calvinism

represents its democratic wing.” 470

Are the Council and the Synod the

Apostolic Voice?

Almost any clergyman, if asked where the

ultimate authority of the Christian church

resides, will say in the universal councils of the church. In 782, the Council of Seville

condemned Migetius for the absurd doctrine

“that only in Rome is divine power

exercised, that only the Roman Church is the Catholic Church, that everything is holy and spotless at Rome and that the words ‘Thou

art Peter, etc.,’ apply only to the Roman

Church instead of the whole church.” To

show the place of the bishop of Rome, the

council recalls that the Pope Liberius was

condemned for heresy. 471

In calling the first ecumenical council, the

emperor was aware, says Eusebius, that “it is not possible to reach correct decisions in important matters except in synods. ”472 “We should not judge each other as individuals,”

says Basil, “but only in general assemblies

of large numbers of bishops.” 473 A catholic church with a single direction “is

impossible,” Constantine writes in his

summons to Nicaea, “unless all or at least

the greater part of the bishops meet

together.” 474 And he states more than once the principle, “Whatever is done in the holy synods of the bishops has the force of the

divine will itself.” 475

“The church teaches and is infallible,”

writes the ever-confident Batiffol. “The

teaching office, which belonged to the

apostles, passed to the bishops taken in their totality or assembled in universal council. Its object is the continuation of the revelation or deposit of the faith and has to do with things

necessary for the conservation of the deposit of the faith.” 476 And yet there was no universal meeting of bishops—the supposed

sole expression of apostolic instruction—for almost three hundred years after the apostles, at which time the emperor, entirely on his

own authority, commanded wildly

disagreeing bishops to come together in his

presence. Under his eye and with his

constant threats and proddings, they brought forth that creed, which is now accepted as

the official statement of the Christian faith.

Ignatius knows of no councils of bishops at

all—even local ones. And as soon as we

have the bishops meeting, those meetings are careful imitations not of the apostles, but of the Roman Senate. Batiffol himself was one

of the first to point this out, though it is extremely obvious from the minutes of the

meetings.

Batiffol notes first of all that the name

synod ( concilium), as used by Clement of Alexandria, is not a religious term. 477 In the time of Augustine, bishops were convoked

by whichever bishop in the province had

held that office for the longest time. He,

regardless of his city, was the primas

[first]. 478 The expression for calling a synod, cogere concilium, was taken from the Roman cogere senatum, to call the senate; the expression to hold a council ( concilium habere) was taken from the Roman senatum habere. 479 The opening words of the Council of Carthage in 256 are “an imitation of the

protocol of the proces-verbaux [record] of the sessions of the Roman Senate.” 480 Even more significant, the meetings of the councils remained public at all times, though only

bishops were allowed actually to

participate. Contrast this with the secrecy of the meetings of the Lord with his apostles, of the apostles among themselves and of the

earliest Christians, which is perhaps the best-known aspect of “apostolic”

assemblies.

The preliminary reading of a case in the

council was called a relatio, exactly as in the Roman Senate; the discussion was called

the verba facere; the final motion the sententia, exactly as in the Senate. Voting was by discessio, standing on one side or the other of the hall. “Whether in Carthage in

256 or in 312,” Batiffol concludes, “or in

Rome in 313, one could not conceive of an

assembly deliberating in any other form than that consecrated by the usage of the

Senate.” 481 “Consecrated” is a good word.

Certainly what there was of order and

discipline in the meetings was the inherited gravity and dignity of pagan Rome: as

Christians, the bishops screamed and spat at each other, and most of the great councils

were scenes of wild disorder.

Karl Joseph von Hefele’s discussion on the nature of church councils at the beginning of his standard work on the subject should

suffice to show the qualifications of synods as depositories of apostolic authority.

Having noted that Acts 15 gives us, without

doubt, the origin of councils, Hefele

continues, “But the theologians are not in

agreement as to whether the councils were

established by divine or human authority. ”482

Then and there Hefele settles the question as to whether councils are apostolic or not—if

they were apostolic, there could be no

possible doubt of their divine origin, yet

where all the historic church councils are

concerned, that is a subject of grave

controversy. What was done by apostles

under the influence of the Holy Spirit, Hefele himself observes, must necessarily have

been according to earlier instructions of the Lord. 483 Thereby he shows his entire

miscomprehension of what apostolic authority is: why earlier instruction? Were not the apostles in a position to receive

instructions from the Lord at any time? Not by Bishop Hefele’s reckoning. As the

strongest proof of the divine nature of

councils, Hefele cites Cyprian’s description of the Council of Carthage in 252: placuit nobis sancto Spiritu suggerente—“We

decided, at the suggestion of the Holy

Spirit. ”484 This is the sort of vague and general rhetoric that flowed naturally from

the mouths of bishops and schoolmen; and

certainly the “suggestion” of the Holy Spirit is anything but a specific claim to literal

guidance by revelation—a claim which

cannot well be made while Christian

churches all deny continued revelation.

Then Hefele cites Constantine’s claim that

the Council of Arles was a caeleste

judicium [celestial court]. The emperor,

desperately hunting for a principle of authority to which to hold his unruly bishops, says that it was a “celestial court” because

“the judgment of priests must always be considered such.” 485 In other words, a council, as such, is divinely inspired only in the sense that any priest is divinely led. Of his own Nicene Council, the emperor says,

“What three hundred holy bishops accept is

not to be interpreted as anything else but the opinion of the only Son of God.” 486 The emperor here appeals to the argument of

numbers: again, it is not the synod as such

that is holy, but the size of the thing that gives it authority. Cicero had used the very same

argument to prove the divinity of senatorial decrees.

In the third century we read of a “council

held by the Greeks in certain places,

meetings of all the churches in which were

discussed the more important common

problems, and a representation of the whole Christian Society [literally, name] was

celebrated with great veneration. ”487 Yet as late as 220, councils were still unknown in

Africa, and Tertullian, in the above passage, refers to the Greek custom as a peculiar thing in the church. Later attempts are made to

describe councils being held by bishops in

the days of the apostles. It is not

inconceivable that quarterly conferences

were held in the primitive church as they are in the restored church, but nothing is more

certain than that such conferences were not

the origin of the episcopal synods of

conventional church history. These synods

are an attempt to fill a gap: “It is not

possible to settle controversies on matters of major import except through synods.” 488

“Whatsoever is done in the holy synods of

the bishops must be attributed to the divine will.” 489 “For whatever such a large number

of bishops agrees on must be taken as arrived at, not automatically, but by God’s

suggestion” (literally, at a nod from God). 490

The expression “at a nod from God,” became

a popular device to “prove” divine authority

—it was an old trick of the cratores [power brokers] to give superhuman power to the

emperor—a noncommittal sort of thing, but

full of implications. Thus Leo describes the besting of a rival in a riot: “Flavian, though he stirred up a tumult, was ejected by the

churches at a nod from God.” 491

The full and vivid minutes of the Synod of

Carthage in A.D. 411 plainly show it to be

just a copy of the local civil comitia [local assemblies], Marcellinus, vir clarissimus tribunarius et notarius [a distinguished and notable man], presiding. Though the accounts of the Nicene and other great councils are

often full and pious, no ritual detail being omitted, it is significant that we never read

of any of the councils being either opened or closed with prayer. And it was not until the twelfth century that any ecumenical council was held in a church! The meeting was

always in a palace or other government

building.

It may seem strange that an institution so

clearly designated as the highest depository of divine authority in the church should stand from the first completely under the command

of the emperor. That is true not only of all the ecumenical councils until the twelfth century, but of important local councils as well. Thus Hefele points out that the Council of Arles in 314 was angeordnet [decreed] by

Constantine the Great, the ecumenical

council of bishops in 381 by Theodosius, the Synod of Orléans in 533 by King Childebert,

and the Synod of Frankfort in 794 by

Charlemagne; even a number of orthodox

synods were held in Rome (early sixth

century) under the direction of Theodoric the Great, who was an Arian. 492 He is careful not to mention Nicaea, at which the role of

the emperor is fully described—for to admit

the unchallenged power of secular rules in

the matter of councils is to rob the Christian church of its one claim to apostolic

direction. In the letter he sent to all those not present at Nicaea, Constantine gives the

official account:

Having by grace of God assumed

responsibility for the common peace of the

empire, I considered my foremost duty to

be to devise means of guaranteeing peace

and love to the most blessed multitudes

[ plethe] of the universal church. But since it was not possible to establish a firm and

reliable order except by having all or at least the greater part of the bishops come

together at a single place, … I myself,

[have] brought you together, and [sit] in

your midst as one of your number. (For I do

not deny, but rather rejoice, to have become a fellow servant with you.) I resolved that

the whole thing should be discussed until a

common agreement was reached, so that

not the slightest possible point of

disagreement should remain to cause future

difficulties. 493

This was not a case of the emperor making

use of an ongoing tradition. Contemporaries

all marvel at the originality and ingenuity of his idea: the first general council of the

church since the days of the apostles! “No

mortal man could discover a remedy to the

ill,” writes Eusebius, “the resources of the contestants being equally matched. Almighty

God alone could cure this too with ease and

in all the world but one man, Constantine

alone, appeared fitting to be his agent in this.

Who, when he had considered the whole

cause … himself bestirred his own mind and concluded that it would be necessary to

make war on the adversary who disturbed the peace of the church.” 494

Constantine himself, however, leaves us in

no doubt as to where he got the idea: we

learn that he had just removed the last

enemies to civil peace by bringing the Senate together at Rome to acclaim his policies and support his lone rule of the world. There, but a few weeks before, a great and magnificent

triumph had been held over the enemy of the

human race, enormous canvases had been

hoisted in the capital showing Constantine

treading upon the serpent, the evil one, his bitter political and military rival, the

Christian Licinius. Just as he had triumphed over the enemy of peace within the state, the emperor announces in speeches and letters,

so now he would triumph over the enemy of

peace in the church—the unrest which has

thrown the empire into civil turmoil from

end to end. And he would do it the same

way: by issuing his orders, calling his solemn assembly, announcing his will, and

sealing all with a solemn and magnificent

triumph to celebrate the establishment of the heavenly rule upon earth.

The Council of Nicaea simply repeated a

few weeks later the senatorial sessions that had been held in Rome. The identical forms

and rituals were observed. The great central room of the palace was the place. Benches

were placed in order, filling up the space on either side of the hall. All invited were

admitted by ticket, and each took an assigned seat. When all the synod was seated and in

decent order, the whole body sat in dead

silence, in expectation of the emperor’s entrance. This was dramatically staged: first came one of the emperor’s attendants, then

another, and then a third. Still more high

officials filed in, not the usual hoplites and spearmen, but only trusted friends of the

emperor. Then at a given signal announcing his approach, all arose to their feet, and at length he appeared, “like unto some heavenly angel of God, wrapped as it were in brilliant light as he cast about him the luster of pearls, gleaming in the flash of his brilliant scarlet robe and adorned with the sparkle and glitter of gold and precious stones.” 495 At last a substitute had been found for the glories of Pentecost and the burning bush: Hollywood

can do anything!

In his opening speech, the emperor left no

one in any doubt as to why he had called the meeting and what he expected of it: an end to Christian rioting. He was out to get a signed agreement that would bring unity into the

church forevermore. He attended the key

discussions with great interest, and one thing only interested him—getting an agreement.

The actual doctrinal issues at stake, he said again and again, neither interested nor

concerned him, and in the closing speech of the mighty council he recommended to all a

word which he had been persuaded to adopt

in committee as the solution to all problems, homoousios [one substance], while frankly admitting that he had not the vaguest idea

what it meant. But he did get his universal

agreement—only seventeen bishops refused

to sign the final formula, and he made it so hot for them that all but two quickly changed their minds; the two were banished.

How was it possible to arrive at this

marvelous consensus in so short a time? This

“heavenly” unity was forever after put

forward as the sure proof that the Holy Ghost had ruled the decisions of the first and

greatest of the councils. Yet all our sources describe the workings of a far more tangible persuasion among the holy bishops. As soon

as the emperor saw a majority favoring one

side or the other of an issue, he would

instantly throw his weight behind that side,

“praising those who spoke in its favor or

turning with withering frowns or even sharp

rebukes toward those who spoke against

it.” 496 In this way the most God-beloved emperor gently prodded the bishops into this or that decision, until in a marvelously short time there was hardly a dissenting voice in

the house. Constantine knew his human

nature and declared in the closing oration

that “real friends of truth are few and hard to find”: what nearly everybody is interested in is a career. 497 So he found no trouble in

“prescribing to the bishops those things

which would be of the greatest benefit to

their churches.” 498 It was indeed a rare soul who held out for principles, and, while

Constantine frankly admired the courage and

independence of Bishop Acesius, who had

refused to answer his summons to Nicaea,

and was far easier on him than he was on

many who “rushed to the capital eager to see the sites and see the emperor,” 499 he explained the difficulty of his position in a private conversation with Acesius, in which

the monarch pointed out that there was no

advantage in trying to climb all alone up his own little ladder to heaven. 500

The Gospel of Bigness and Power

The emperor was perfectly sincere in his

gospel of bigness and power, but to the true saint, as to the true philosopher, it has a

cynical and despairing undertone. Yet in a

frank and revealing study, Father Bligh has

declared flatly for the emperor: whatever

brings the greatest number of people under Christian influence is to be regarded as a

blessing, no matter how it may corrupt and

contaminate that influence. “The title of

ίσαπόστολος [equal to the apostles!] given

to Constantine by the Eastern Church was not

altogether undeserved, if one considers only the extent of his influence upon the expansion of Christianity.” 501 What else is there to consider, if we grant Father Bligh his thesis that the importance of numbers outweighs all other considerations? Constantine actually

did “convert” far more people than the

apostles did, for Father Bligh and his church are quite content with that kind of

conversion. There was some protest against

the deifying of the emperor and the glorifying of the victory of the Pons Milvius at the time, but that protest was forgotten, and ever since then the Christian church has looked back on the fourth century as the golden age, which

remained the ideal during the Middle Ages

and for churchmen the perfect model of the

heavenly order on earth.

The argument of numbers is actually only

the argument of force—and that is where the

emperor comes in. How frank is Pope

Liberius when he writes to the Macedonians that since the opinion of such a large number of bishops (as at Nicaea) cannot be regarded as anything but God’s doing, let us reason

with them (the Arian opposition) “by

persuasion, or, to speak bluntly, with

worldly force.” 502 The bishops have never been able to carry out their leadership for

any length of time without the immediate and powerful support of the secular arm. “Except for thy mighty arm,” wrote Pope Stephanus II to Pepin, “we have no other support save

God alone,” 503 and plainly God alone is not enough, since the Pope is begging for Pepin’s army. But Tertullian was right: where the

power is, there is the authority. 504 “From the moment [the emperors] began to be

Christians,” writes Socrates, “the affairs of the church began to be regulated by them,

and the greatest synods were, and still are, held according to their mind and will.” 505

The mighty Athanasius, the hero of the churchmen, repeatedly defied the emperor—

and after a repeated battle of wills, knuckled under.

Notes

1. “Jusqu’ici, elle n’a guère su qu’aimer.” Ernest Renan, L’Antechrist (Paris: Michel Lévy Frères, 1873), i.

2. J. B. Lightfoot, Dissertations on the Apostolic Age (London: Macmillan, 1892), 155.

3. Olof Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche in der neueren Forschung: Eine kritische

Darstellung (Uppsala: Almquist and Wiksells, 1932), 4–5.

4. “Die Kirche kann ohne Organisation sein, kann aber ohne Organisation nicht bestehen. ”

Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 8, emphasis in original.

5. “Die Gemeindeverfassung ist ein rein profanes Gebilde.” Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 29.

6. Edwin Hatch, The Organization of the Early Christian Churches: Eight Lectures

Delivered before the University of Oxford, in the Year 1880 (London: Rivingtons, 1881), 26–32, 57–81.

7. Rudolf Sohm, Kirchenrecht, 2 vols., Systematisches Handbuch der deutschen

Rechtswissenschaft 8 (Munich: Duncker and

Humblot, 1923), 1:6.

8. “Das feierlich vor Gott versammelte Volk Israel (hebräisch Kahal).” Sohm,

Kirchenrecht, 1:17.

9. “Das Wort Ekklesia [drückt] keinen socialen Begriff [aus] … sondern lediglich ein

dogmatisches Werturteil.” Sohm,

Kirchenrecht, 1:19.

10. “Nur die Ekklesia ist organisiert. … Die Ekklesia ist der rechtlichen Organisation

unfähig.” Sohm, Kirchenrecht, 1:22.

11. Karl Holl, “Der Kirchenbegriff des Paulus in seinem Verhältnis zu dem der Urgemeinde,”

Sitzungsberichte der preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin (1921): 928, in Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Kirchengeschichte (Tübingen: Mohr, 1928), 2:50–51; Sohm,

Kirchenrecht, 1:4.

12. See Adolf von Harnack, The Constitution and Law of the Church in the First Two

Centuries (London: Williams & Norgate, 1910), esp. appendix 1, pp. 175–258.

13. Roland Schütz, Apostel und Jünger: Eine quellenkritische und geschichtliche

Untersuchung über die Entstehung des

Christentums (Giessen: Töpelmann, 1921), 71–78.

14. “Die ‘Kirchen’ waren örtliche Vereinigungen, Korporationen, also ‘Gemeinden,’ Sie

bestanden ‘autonom,’ selbständig neben

einander. Ein Gemeindeverband existierte

nicht. Jede Gemeinde wählte ihre Vorsteher.”

Otto Scheel, Die Kirche im Urchristentum mit Durchblicken auf die Gegenwart,

Religionsgeschichtliche Volksbücher für die

deutsche christliche Gegenwart 4.20

(Tübingen: Mohr, 1912), 5, quoted in Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 119.

15. Johannes Weiss, Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes, 2nd ed. (Göttingen:

Vandendoeck and Ruprecht, 1900), quoted in

Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 120–21.

16. Quoted in Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 123.

17. “Die Entwickelung geht zunächst vom Ganzen zum Teil.” Adolf von Harnack,

Entstehung und Entwickelung der

Kirchenverfassung und des Kirchenrechts in den zwei ersten Jahrhunderten (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1910), 38.

18. “ ‘Ekklesia’ [bedeutet] immer ‘Gesamtkirche’

und die Enzelgemeinde [ist] nur ‘Darstellung’

derselben.” Rudolf Sohm, quoted in Linton,

Das Problem der Urkirche, 136.

19. Pierre Batiffol, L’Église naissante et le Catholicisme (Paris: Lecoffre, 1909), 90; Henri Leclercq, “Église,” in Dictionaire d’Archéologie Chrétienne et de Liturgie, ed.

Fernand Carol and Henri Leclercq (Paris:

Librairie Letouzey et Ané, 1925), 4.2.2220–

38; Wilhelm Koester, Die Idee der Kirche beim Apostel Paulus, Neutestamentliche Abhandlungen 19.1 (Münster: Aschendorff,

1928), 1–15; see also Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 138–42.

20. Rudolf Sohm, quoted in Linton, Das

Problem der Urkirche, 188–95.

21. Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 195.

22. “Die Gemeinde ist im Kultus Darstellung der himmlischen Ekklesia. Als solche muss sie wie die Gesamtekklesia organisiert sein… . Die

Gemeinde [ist] ein Abbild der Kirche.”

Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 196.

23. Theodor Schermann, Die allgemeine Kirchenordnung, frühchristliche Liturgien und kirchliche Überlieferung, Studien zur Geschichte und Kulture des Altertums, 3 vols.

in one (Paderborn: Schöningh, 1914–16), 2:5–

7.

24. Hans Lietzmann, Geschichte der Alten Kirche, 3 vols. (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1932), 1:55.

25. T. W. Manson, “The New Testament Basis of the Doctrine of the Church,” Journal of Ecclesiastical History 1 (1950): 3–4, emphasis added.

26. Kirsopp Lake, “The Shepherd of Hermas and Christian Life in Rome in the Second

Century,” Harvard Theological Review 4

(1911): 37.

27. “Keine Missionskirche beginnt mit autonomen Gemeinden.” Karl Holl, quoted in

Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 198.

28. Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 198.

29. Giovanni Battista Pighi, Institutiones historiae ecclesiasticae, ed. altera, 3 vols.

(Verona: Sorires Cinquetti Filiae Felicis,

1906), 1:12.

30. εἶπεν ὅτι ὅταν κηρυχθῇ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον ἐν

πᾶσι τοῖς ἔθνεσι, τότε ἥξει τὸ τέλος· καὶ ἰδοὺ

πρὸς τὸ τέλος λοιπὸν ἐφθάσαμεν. τὸ γὰρ

πλέον τῆς οἰκουμένης κατηγγέλῆ λοιπὸν οὖν

τὸ τέλος ἐνέστηκε. John Chrysostom, In

Epistolam ad Hebraeos 21.3, in J.-P. Migne, ed., Patrologiae Cursus Completus … Series Graeca, 161 vols. (Paris: Migne, 1857–66), 63:152 (hereafter PG).

31. Source unidentified.

32. J. B. Lightfoot, Saint Paul’s Epistle to the Galatians, rev. ed. (London: Macmillan, 1921), 94, quoted in Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 74.

33. Sed neque propheta, neque apostolus in hoc tempore speretur a vobis aliquis alius

praeter nos. Unus enim est verus propheta, cuius nos duodecim apostoli verba

praedicamus. Recognitiones Clementinae

4.35, in PG 1:1330.

34. Recognitiones Clementinae 4.35, in PG

1:1330.

35. Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 77–89.

36. “Die Zwölf erscheinen als kompakte Gruppe von der sich als Individuen nur Petrus und der Zebedaïde Johannes ablösen. Diese beiden

bilden mit Jakobus zusammen die ‘Saülen’ der Urgemeinde.” Lietzmann, Geschichte der

Alten Kirche, 1:59.

37. Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 194.

38. “Die höchste Autorität aber bilden die Zwölf, und an ihrer Spitze Petrus.” Eduard Meyer,

Ursprung und Anfänge des Christentums

(Darmstadt: Wissenshaftliche

Buchgesellschaft, 1962), 3:263–64.

39. ἐπειδὴ γὰρ τοῦ τυράννου τελευτήσαντος ἀπὸ

τῆς Πάτμου τῆς νήσου μετη·λθεν ἐπὶ τὴν

Ἕφεσον, ἀπῄει παρακαλούμενος καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ

πλησιόχωρα τῶν ἐθνῶν, ὅπου μὲν

ἐπισκόπους καταστήσων, ὅπου δὲ ὅλας

ἐκκλησίας ἁρμόσων, ὅπου δὲ κλῆρον ἕνα γέ

τινα κληρώσων τῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ πνεύματος

σημαινομένων. Eusebius, Historia

Ecclesiastica 3.23.6, in PG 20:257.

40. ὡς δ᾽ ὁ ἱερὸς τῶν ἀποστόλων χορὸς

διάφορον εἰλήφει τοῦ βίου τέλος,

παρεληλύθει τε ἡ γενεὰ ἐκείνη τῶν αὐταῖς

ἀκοαῖς τῆς ἐνθέου σοφίας ἐπακοῦσαι

κατηξιωμένην, τηνικαῦτα τῆς ἀθέου πλάνης

τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐλάμβανεν ἡ σύστασις, διὰ τῆς τῶν

ἑτεροδιδασκάλων ἀπάτης· οἳ καὶ ἅτε μηδενὸς

ἔτι τῶν ἀποστόλων λειπομένου, γυμνῇ

λοιπὸν ἤδη τῇ κεφαλῇ, τῷ τῆς ἀληθείας

κηρύγματι τὴν ψευδώνυμον γνῶσιν

ἀντικηρύττειν ἐπεχείρουν. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 3.32.8, in PG 20:284.

41. Holl, “Der Kirchenbegriff des Paulus,” 930

n. 1.

42. See Hermann Vogelstein, “The Development of the Apostolate in Judaism and Its

Transformation in Christianity,” Hebrew

Union College Annual 2 (1925): 112, 114; Vogelstein, “Die Entstehung und Entwicklung

des Apostolats im Judentum,” Monatschrift

für Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums 49 (1905): 428; and Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 91.

43. Vogelstein, “Development of the Apostolate,”

118; and “Die Entstehung und Entwicklung

des Apostolats,” 447–48.

44. Vogelstein, “Development of the Apostolate,”

119.

45. “… so original wie Jesus selbst.” Vogelstein, quoted in Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 93–94.

46. “Die Apostel gingen von Ort zu Ort, ohne irgendwo lange Zeit zu bleiben… . Die zweite Möglichkeit wurde aber recht früh als die

normale angesehen (Apg. [Acts] 14:23).”

Adolf von Harnack, quoted in Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 198.

47. “… une fraternité, essaimant sur toute la terre sans se détendre, se formant partout en petites chretientés pareilles, coopérantes,

ayant même foi, même culte, même

autorités.” Batiffol, L’Église naissante et le Catholicisme, x.

48. “La chrétienté est née catholique.” Batiffol,

L’Église naissante et le Catholicisme, xi.

49. “Avait aux premiers temps une perpétuelle circulation d’apôtres, de missionnaires, de

prophètes, de docteurs.” Louis Duchesne,

Origines du Culte Chrétien: Étude sur la Liturgie Latine avant Charlemagne, 5th ed.

(Paris: de Boccard, 1925), 14.

50. “Les premiers temps passes, une fois disparu tout ce personnel itinerant, ubiquiste, il ne resta plus que les organizations ecclésiastiques locales.” Duchesne, Origines du Culte

Chrétien, 14.

51. “La grande Babylone de l’Occident, tant maudite des prophètes juifs.” Duchesne,

Origines du Culte Chrétien, 14.

52. Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 15–

16.

53. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum, in PG 2:32–

56.

54. Sohm, Kirchenrecht, 1:88.

55. Sohm, Kirchenrecht, 101–2.

56. τοῖς δὲ πρεσβυτέροις ; διπλῆ καὶ αὐτοῖς

ἀφοριζέσθω ἡ μοῖπα εἰς χάπιν τῶν τοῦ

κυρίου ἀποστόλων, ὧν καὶ τόν τόπον

φυλάσσουσιν ὡς σύμβουλοι τοῦ ἐπισκόπου

καὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας στέφανος· εἰσὶν γὰρ

συνέδριον καὶ βουλὴ τῆς ἐκκλησίας.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.28.4, in PG

1:673.

57. Quoted in Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 51, 136, 196.

58. εἰ δὲ καὶ ἀναγνώστης ἔστιν, λαμβανέτω καὶ

αὐτὸς μοῖραν μίαν εἰς τιμὴν τῶν προφητῶν.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.28.5, in PG

1:673.

59. ἀφοριζέσθω δὲ ἐν τῇ δοχῇ τῷ ποιμένι ἔθιμον

; ὡς ἱερεῖ. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.28.2, in PG 1:673.

60. διπλοῦν διδόσθω τοῖς διακόνοις εἰ; γέρας

Χριστοῦ. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.28.3, in PG 1:673.

61. οὐδὲ γὰρ τῷ παντοκράτορι θεῷ προσελθεῖν

ἔστιν, ἐὰν μὴ διὰ τοῦ Χριστοῦ. οὕτως οὖν καὶ

οἱ λαῒκοὶ πάντα ὅσα βούλονται διὰ τοῦ

διακόνου φανερὰ τῷ ἐπισκόπῳ ποιείτωσαν.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.28.6, in PG

1:674.

62. ὡς θεοῦ διακόνοις. Constitutiones

Apostolicae 4.13.1, in PG 1:825.

63. ἡ παρθένος οὖν αὕτη ἔστω ἁγία σώματι καὶ

ψυχῇ, ὡς ναὸς θεοῦ, ὡς οἶκος Χριστοῦ, ὡς

πνεύματος ἁγίου καταγώγιον. Constitutiones Apostolicae 4.14.2, in PG 1:825.

64. αἵ τε χῆραι καὶ οἱ ὀρφανοὶ εἰς τύπον τοῦ

θυσιαστηρίου λελογίσθωσαν ὑμῖν· αἵ τε

παρθένοι εἰς τύπον τοῦ θυμιατηρίου

τετιμήσθωσαν καὶ τοῦ θυμιάματος.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.26.8, in PG

1:668–69.

65. εἰ γὰρ Ἀαρών, ἐπειδὴ ἢγγελλεν τῷ Φαραὼ

παρὰ Μωσέως τοὺς λόγους, προφήτης

εἴρηται ; διοτί μὴ καὶ ὑμεῖς τοὺς μεσίτας

ὑμῶν τοῦ λόγου προφήτας εἶναι νομίσητε καὶ

ὡς θεοὺς σεβασθήσεσθὲ Νῦν γὰρ ὑμῖν μὲν ὁ

Ἀαρών ἐστιν ὁ διάκονος, Μωῢσῆς δὲ ὁ

ἐπίσκοπος ; ὡς γὰρ ὁ Χριστὸς ἄνευ τοῦ

πατρὸς οὐδὲν ποιεῖ, οὕτως οὐδὲ ὁ διάκονος

ἄνευ τοῦ ἐπισκόπου ; καὶ ὥσπερ ὁ υἱὸς

ἄγγελός ἐστιν καὶ προφήτης τοῦ πατρός,

οὕτως καὶ ὁ διάκονος ἄγγελος καὶ προφήτης

ἐστὶν τοῦ ἐπισκόπου. Constitutiones

Apostolicae 2.29.1–2.30.2, in PG 1:676–77.

66. τὸν μέντοι ποιμένα τὸν ἀγαθὸν ὁ λαῒκὸς

τιμάτω, ἀγαπάτω, φοβείσθω, ὡς κύριον, ὡς

δεσπότην, ὡς ἀρχιερέα θεοῦ, ὡς διδάσκαλον

εὐσεβείας. ὁ γὰρ αὐτοῦ ἀκούων, Χριστοῦ

ἀκούει. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.20, in PG 1:633.

67. πάντες τῷ ἐπισκόπῳ ἀκολουθεῖτε, ὡς

Ἰησοῦς Χριστὸς τῷ πατρὶ, καὶ τῷ

πρεσβυτερίῳ ὡς τοῖς ἀποστόλοις. Ignatius,

Epistola ad Smyrneos 8.1, 9.1, in PG 5:949–

52.

68. Ignatius, Epistola ad Ephesias 6.1.

69. ὥσπερ οὖν ὁ κύριος ἄνευ τοῦ πατρὸς οὐδὲν

ἐποίησεν, ἡνωμένος ὤν, οὔτε δι᾽ ἑαυτοῦ,

οὔτε διὰ τῶν ἀποστόλων· οὕτως μηδὲ ὑμεῖς

ἄνευ τοῦ ἐπισκόπου καὶ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων

μηδὲν πράσσετε. Ignatius, Epistola ad

Magnesios 7.1, in PG 5:668.

70. ἐγὼ εἶπᾶ θεοί ἐστε καὶ υἱοὶ ὑψίστου πάντες ; ὁ γὰρ ἐπίσκοπος προκαθεζέσθαι ὑμῶν ὡς

θεοῦ ἀξίᾳ τετιμημένος, ᾗ κρατεῖ τοῦ κλήρου

καὶ τοῦ λαοῦ παντὸς ἄρχει. ὁ δὲ διάκονος

τούτῳ παριστάσθω ὡς ὁ Χριστὸς τῷ πατρί; .

ἡ δὲ διάκονος εἰς τύπον τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος

τετιμήσθω ὑμῖν; . καὶ ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν εἰς τὸν

Χριστὸν πιστεῦσαι ἄνευ τῆς τοῦ πνεύματος

διδασκαλίας, οὕτως ἄνευ τῆς διακόνου

μηδεμία προσίτω γυνὴ τῷ διακόνῳ ἢ τῷ

ἐπισκόπῳ. οἵ τε πρεσβύτεροι εἰς τύπον ἡμῶν

τῶν ἀποστόλων ὑμῖν νενομίσθωσαν.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.26.4–7, in PG

1:668.

71. ἀντίψυχον ἐγὼ τῶν ὑποτασσομένων τῷ

ἐπισκόπῳ, πρεσβυτέροις, διακόνοις· καὶ μετ᾽

αὐτῶν μοι τὸ μέρος γένοιτο σχεῖν ἐν θεῷ.

Ignatius, Epistola ad Polycarpem 6.1, in PG

5:724.

72. Source unidentified.

73. τῷ ἐπισκόπῳ προσέχετε, ἵνα καὶ ὁ θεὸς

ὑμῖν. Ignatius, Epistola ad Polycarpem 6.1, in PG 5:724.

74. Source unidentified.

75. Tertullian, De Pudicita 21, in J.-P. Migne, ed., Patrologiae Cursus Completus … Series Latina/Rom, 221 vols. (Paris: Migne, 1844–

64), 2:1023–26 (hereafter PL).

76. Episcopi vero, domini apostolorum; presbyteri quoque, septuaginta duorum

discipulorum locum tenent. Anacletus, Epistola 3.1, in PG 2:812.

77. Acts 20:17, 28; Titus 1:7; Jerome, Epistola 146, in PL 22:1192–95.

78. Source unidentified.

79. Hatch, Organization of the Early Christian Churches, 78.

80. Adolf von Harnack, Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte, 5th ed. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1931), 1:237.

81. Adolf von Harnack, Die Lehre der zwölf Apostel nebst Untersuchungen zur Ältesten Geschichte der Kirchenverfassung und des Kirchenrechts (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1884) 94–

96, 143–48.

82. “… ein göttliches Mandat.” Harnack, Die Lehre der zwölf Apostel, 96, 103.

83. Harnack, Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte, 1:236; Lehre der Zwölf Apostel, 140–41.

84. Sohm, Kirchenrecht, 1:4.

85. “Auf der einen Seite steht also die gesamtkirchliche Organisation der

charismatischen Lehrbegabten, auf der

anderen die Gemeindeorganisation der

Administrativbeamten. Das ist die berühmte Harnacksche Hypothese einer doppelten

Organisation der Urkirche.” Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 42, emphasis in original.

86. “Grundlegend blieb aber die Unterscheidung zwischen zwei Organisationen: der der Gesamtkirche und der der Einzelgemeinde.”

Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 42, emphasis in original.

87. οὔτε γὰρ φύσει, οὔτε ἀνθρωπίνῃ ἐννοίᾳ

οὕτω μεγάλα καὶ θεῖα γινώσκειν ἀνθρῶποις

δυνατόν, ἀλλὰ τῇ ἄνωθεν ἐπὶ τοὺς ἁγίους

ἄνδρας τηνικαῦτα κατελθούσῃ δωρεᾷ, οἶς οὐ

λόγων ἐδέησε τέχνης, οὐδὲ τοῦ ἐριστικῶς τι

καὶ φιλονείκως εἰπεῖν, ἀλλὰ καθαροὺς

ἑαυτοὺς τῇ τοῦ θείου Πνεύματος παρασχεῖν

ἐνεργείᾳ, ἵν᾽ αὐτὸ τὸ θεῖον ἐξ οὐρανοῦ

κατιὸν πλῆκτρον, ὥσπερ ὀργάνῳ κιθάρας

τινὸς ἢ λύρας, τοῖς δικαίοις ἀνδράσι

χρώμενον, τὴν τῶν θείων ἡμῖν καὶ οὐρανίων

ἀποκαλύψῃ γνῶσιν. Justin Martyr, Cohortatio ad Graecos 8, in PG 6:256–57.

88. Tertullian, De Pudicitia 21, in PL 2:1023–

26.

89. Ἰακώβῳ τῷ Δικαίῳ καὶ Ἰωάννῃ καὶ Πέτρῳ

μετὰ τὴν ἀνάστασιν παρέδωκε τὴν γνῶσιν ὁ

Κύριος. οὗτοι τοῖς λοιποῖς ἀποστόλος

παρέδωκαν. οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ ἀποστόλοι τοῖς

ἑβδομήκοντα. Eusebius, Historia

Ecclesiastica 2.1.4, in PG 20:136.

90. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 4.33.7, in PG

7:1077–78.

91. Meminisse autem diaconi debent quoniam apostolos, id est episcopos et praepositos Dominus elegit, diaconos autem, post

ascensum Domini in caelos, apostoli sibi constituerunt episcopatus sui et Ecclesiae ministros. Cyprian, Epistola 65.3, in PL

4:408.

92. ἐν τῇ πρὸς Κορινθίους ἐπιστολῇ ὁ

ἀπόστολος Κλήμης. Clement of Alexandria,

Stromata 4.17, in PG 8:1312.

93. Ἀπόστολος. Superius dictum est, viros apostolicos nonnumquam apostolos ab

antiquis Patribus appellatos fuisse. PG

8:1312 n. 30.

94. στόμα θεοῦ εἶναι τοὺς ἐπισκόπους.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.28.9, in PG

1:676.

95. Hippolytus, De LXX Apostolis, in PG

10:953–58.

96. Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 15–

16.

97. πάντες τῷ ἐπισκόπῳ ἀκολουθεῖτε, ὡς

Ἰησοῦς Χριστὸς τῷ πατρί, καί τῷ

πρεσβυτερίῳ ὡς τοῖς ἀποστόλοις ; ὅπου ἃν

φανῇ ὁ ἐπίσκοπος, ἐπεῖ τὸ πλῆθος ἔστῶ

ὥσπερ ὅπου ἃν ᾖ Χριστὸς Ἰησοῦς, ἐκεῖ ἡ

καθολικὴ ἐκκλησία. Ignatius, Epistola ad Smyrneos 8.1–2, in PG 5:713.

98. ταῦτα οὐχ ὡς ἀπόστολος διατάσσομαῖ τίς

γάρ είμι ἐγώ ἢ τίς ὁ οἶκος τοῦ πατρός μου,

ἵνα ἰσότιμον ἐμαυτὸν ἐκείνων εἴπω. Ignatius, Epistola ad Philadelphenses 4, in PG 5:828.

99. “Il est impossible, du reste, de contester que l’épiscopat, tel que les Épîtres d’Ignace le représentent, est une fonction essentiellement locale et dont l’autorité est limitée à la

communauté même où elle s’exerce. Nulle

part Ignace ne se prévaut de son titre

d’éveque d’Antioche pour donner plus

d’autorité à ses enseignements.” Jean Reville,

“Études sur les Origines de l’Épiscopat: La

Valeur du Témoignage d’Ignace d’Antioche,”

Revue de l’Histoire des Religions 21 (1890): 284.

100. “Voilà une série de lettres qui se distinguent surtout par l’ardeur avec laquelle leur auteur plaide la cause de l’épiscopat, réclame une

soumission absolue des fidèles envers leurs

évêques: et les deux arguments principaux, les deux colonnes sur lesquelles repose dès

l’origine la notion même de l’épiscopat,

catholique n’y figurent pas!” Reville, “Études sur les Origines de l’Épiscopat,” 285.

101. Ignatius, Epistola ad Romanos 4.3; 8–9, in PG 5:677, 680; Epistola ad Trallianos 3; 5–

6, in PG 5:689, 693–96.

102. “On ne saurait trop insister sur ce trait si curieux de la littérature ignatienne … :

l’absence complète de toute allusion à

l’institution apostolique de l’épiscopat et de toute justification du pouvoir épiscopal par le principe de la succession apostolique.”

Reville, “Études sur les Origines de

l’Épiscopat,” 285.

103. ἐκεῖνοι ἀπόσολοι, ἐγὼ κατάκριτος.

Ignatius, Epistola ad Romanos 4.3, in PG

5:689 (see also 5:808).

104. “Si l’autorité des évêques dans les communautés avait été réellement aussi bien

établie que le demande Ignace, il n’aurait eu aucune raison d’insister avec autant d’énergie sur l’obligation d’une déférence respectueuse envers eux.” Reville, “Études sur les Origines de l’Épiscopat,” 287.

105. “On ne voit pas davantage une trace quelconque de réunions où les évêques se

concertent, comme il y en aura dès la seconde moitié du IIe siécle. L’évêque … non

seulement n’a pas encore de caractère

sacerdotal, mais il n’a pas davantage le

caractère catholique.” Reville, “Études sur les Origines de l’Épiscopat,” 285.

106. οὔτε γὰρ ἐγώ, οὔτε ἄλλος ὅμοιος ἐμοὶ

δύναται κατακολουθῆσαι τῇ σοφίᾳ τοῦ

μακαρίου καὶ ἐνδόξου Παύλου, ὃς γενόμενος

ἐν ὑμῖν κατὰ πρόσωπον τῶν τότε ἀνθρώπων

ἐδίδαξεν ἀκριβῶς καὶ βεβαίως τὸν περὶ

ἀληθείας λόγον, ὃς καὶ ἀπὼν ὑμῖν ἔγραψεν

ἐπιστολάς, εἰς ἃς ἐὰν ἐγκύπτητε,

δυνηθήσεσθε οἰκοδομεῖσθαι εἰς τὴν δοθεῖσαν

ὑμῖν πίστιν. Polycarp, Epistola ad

Philippenses 3.2, in PG 5:1008.

107. The controversy concerned the designation of the appropriate date for Easter celebrations.

Herbert Thurston, “Easter Controversy,” in

Catholic Encyclopedia (New York: Appleton, 1909), 5:228.

108. ὁ Χριστὸς οὖν ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ [ἐξεπέμφθη], καὶ οἱ ἀπόστολοι ἀπὸ τοῦ Χριστοῦ. Clement,

Epistola Primera ad Corinthios 42.2, in PG

1:292.

109. Clement, Epistola Primera ad Corinthios 44.1–2, in PG 1:295–96.

110. 127 Canons of the Apostles 2.12, in François Nau and René Graffin, eds.,

Patrologia Orientalis (Paris: Librairie de Paris, Firmin-Didot, 1903– ), 8:668–69

(hereafter PO).

111. ἄρα τύπος ἦσαν οἱ ἀπόστολοι, ἀρχέτυπόν

τινα εἰκόνα διασώζοντες. John Chrysostom,

In Epistola m ad Philippenses 3.12.3, in PG

62:273.

112. Schermann, Die allgemeine Kirchenordnung, 2:45.

113. “Alle … von den Aposteln durch Handauflegung Bestellte teilten sich in die

ἐπισκοπηv und konnten daher den Namen

ἐπίσκοπος haben.” Schermann, Die

allgemeine Kirchenordnung, 2:39.

114. “Solange die Apostel lebten … die liturgischen Funktionen selbst ausgeübt und in den Städten, wo sie Christengemeinden

gründeten, πρεσβύτεροι aufgestellt, welche ihr Amt dort weiterhin vertraten… . Diese

ortsansässigen Liturgen und Vorsteher der

Gemeinde wurden auch nach ihrem Amte

ἐπίσκοποι benannt.” Schermann, Die

allgemeine Kirchenordnung, 2:38–39.

115. Habemus annumerare eos qui ab apostolis instituti sunt episcopi, et successores eorum usque ad nos. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 3.2.2, in PG 7:848.

116. Cum autem ad eam iterum traditionem, quae est ab apostolis, quae per successiones presbyterorum in Ecclesias custoditur,

provocamus eos. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 2.2.2, in PG 7:847.

117. Tertullian, De Praescriptionibus 32, in PL

2:44–45.

118. Tertullian, De Pudicitia 21, in PL 2:1026.

119. Gospel of the Twelve Apostles, in PO 2:147.

120. Constitutiones Apostolicae 8.4–5, in PG

1:1069–76.

121. διαδέχεται δὲ τὴν Ἐκκλησίαν μετὰ τῶν

ἀποστόλων, ὁ ἀδελφὸς τοῦ Κυρίου Ἰάκωβος.

Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 2.23.4, in PG 20:197.

122. Jerome, De Viris Illustribus 2, in PL

23:639.

123. μηδένα πω εἰς δεῦρο τῶν ἐκκλησιαστικῶν

συγγραφέων διέγνων περὶ τοῦτο τῆς γραφῆς

σπουδὴν πεποιημένον τὸ μέρος. Eusebius,

Historia Ecclesiastica 1.1.5, in PG 20:52.

124. τὰς τῶν ἱερῶν ἀποστόλων διαδοχάς ; καὶ

ὅσοι ταύτης διαπρεπῶς ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα

ἐπισημοτάταις παροικίαις. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 1.1.1, in PG 20:48.

125. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica, in PG 20.

Jerusalem is discussed in 3.11, 4.5, 5.12;

Rome in 5.6; Antioch in 3.22; and Alexandria in 3.21.

126. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 3.3.3, in PG

7:849–50.

127. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 1.1.4, in PG 20:49–52.

128. καὶ γὰρ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν μεγάλα στοιχεῖα

κεκοίμηται. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 5.24.2, in PG 20:493.

129. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 2.1.3, in PG 20:136.

130. Πέτρον γάρ φήσιν καὶ Ἰακώβου καὶ

Ἰωάννην μετὰ τὴν ἀνάληψιν τοῦ Σωτῆρος, ὡς

ἂν καὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ Κυρίου προτετιμημένους, μὴ

ἐπιδικάζεσθαι δόξας, ἀλλ᾽ Ἰάκωβον τὸν

Δίκαιον ἐπίσκοπον ἱεροσολύμην ἑλέσθαι.

Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 2.1.3, in PG

20:136.

131. Ἰάκωβος ὁ ἀδελφὸς τοῦ Κυρίου τὴν

ἐκκλησίαν τότε ἐπεσκόπευεν ἐν ἀρχῇ, τὴν ἐν

Ἱεροσολύμοις, καὶ τῶν ἐξ Ἰουδαίων

πιστευσάντων προειστήκει πάντων.

συνέβαινε δὲ εἶναι καὶ ἐν Ἀντιοχείᾳ

Ἰουδαίους, οἵτινες πιστεύσαντες τῷ Χριστῷ,

διὰ τὸ τῶν Ἱεροσολύμων εἶναι πόρρω, καὶ

πολλοὺς ὁρᾷν τοὺς ἐξ ἐθνῶν πεπιστευκότας

ἀδεῶς. ; κατελθὼν τοίνυν ὁ Πέτρος ; ἐθνικῶς

ἔζη λοιπόν. John Chrysostom, In Illud, in Faciem Ei Restiti 14, in PG 51:382–83.

132. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 2.1.4, in PG 20:136.

133. οἱ ἀπόστολοι ἡμῖν εὐηγγελίσθησαν ἀπὸ τοῦ

Κυρίου Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, Ἰησοῦς ὁ Χριστὸς

ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐξεπέμφθη. ὁ Χριστὸς οὖν ἀπὸ

τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ οἱ ἀπόστολοι ἀπὸ τοῦ Χριστοῦ.

Clement, Epistola Primera ad Corinthios 42.1–2, in PG 1:293.

134. κατὰ χώρας οὖν καὶ πόλεις κηρύσσοντες

καθίστανον τὰς ἀπαρχὰς αὐτῶν,

δοκιμάσαντες τῷ πνεύματι, εἰς ἐπισκόπους

καὶ διακόνους τῶν μελλόντων πιστεύειν.

Clement, Epistola Primera ad Corinthios 42.4, in PG 1:292–93.

135. καὶ τοῦτο οὐ καινῶς, ἐκ γὰρ δὴ πολλῶν

χρόνων ἐγέγραπτο περὶ ἐπισκόπων καὶ

διακόνων· Καταστήσω τοὺς ἐπισκόπους

αὐτῶν ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ καὶ τοὺς διακόνους

αὐτῶν ἐν πίστει. Clement, Epistola Primera ad Corinthios 42.5, in PG 1:293.

136. Tertullian, De Pudicitia 21, in PL 2:1023–

26.

137. Apud nos apostolorum locum episcopi tenent; apud eos episcopus tertius est. Jerome, Epistola 41.3, in PL 22:476.

138. Jerome, Epistola 41, in PL 22:474–76.

139. Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 3.

140. Lake, “Christian Life in Rome,” 38.

141. Ibid., 38–39.

142. Ibid., 37.

143. “[Die Theorie] der monarchisch gewordene Episkopat als Träger der apostolischen

Sukzession; es kam die Rechtsfiktion auf.”

Eduard Schwartz, Kaiser Constantin und die Christliche Kirche (Stuttgart: Teubner, 1969), 24.

144. “Apostolat und Diakonat haben noch nichts mit der Rangordnung der späteren Hierarchie

zu tun.” Theodor Brandt, Kirche im Wandel der Zeit (Wuppertal: Brockhaus, 1977), 2:37.

145. “[Les] évêques … reconnaissent l’autorité supérieure des apôtres … fondateurs et

maîtres spirituals … de toutes les chrétienés en general… . A mesure que disparaissent ces grands chefs, on voit apparaître la hiérarchie

definitive.” Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 8.

146. Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 7–

9.

147. Sozomen, Historia Ecclesiastica 1.15.

148. Si quis diaconus regens plebem sine episcopo vel presbytero aliquos baptizaverit, episcopus eos per benedictionem perficere debebit; quod si ante de saeculo recesserint, sub fide qua quis credidit poterit esse justus.

Council of Elvira, Canon 77, in Karl Joseph

von Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, trans. a Benedictine monk of St. Michael’s Abbey in Farnborough,

10 vols. (Paris: Letouzey et Ané, 1907),

1:261–62.

149. ἵνα ἀσφαλὲς ᾖ καὶ βέβαιον πᾶν ὃ

πράσσεται. Ignatius, Epistola ad Smyrneos 8.2, in PG 5:713 (see 5:852).

150. “Mais la cathedra est l’insigne exclusif de l’évêque, le symbole de son autorité, le

symbole de l’unité de l’Église.” Pierre

Batiffol, Cathedra Petri: Études d’Histoire ancienne de l’Église (Paris: de la Tour

Maubourg, 1938), 108.

151. Hugo Koch, “Bischofsstuhl und Priesterstühle zu Canon 58 von Elvira,”

Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte 7 (1925): 172–75.

152. Louis Duchesne, Fastes Épiscopaux de l’Ancienne Gaule, 2nd ed. (Paris:

Fontemoing, 1907), 1:39–40.

153. … sub umbraculo insignissimae religionis.

Tertullian, Apologeticus Adversus Gentes pro Christianis 21, in PL 1:450. See Hugh Nibley, The World and the Prophets (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1987),

221.

154. “Die Kirche Gottes, die im Rom zu Gaste ist, grüßt die Kirche Gottes, die in Korinth zu Gaste ist… . Und sie ist auf Erden nur zu

Gaste, ist ein Fremdling.” Lietzmann,

Geschichte der Alten Kirche, 2:42.

155. “Es sind zwei aus dem Judentum übernommene Glaubensgedanken, der des

Volk Gottes und der des geistlichen

Charisma… . Vom ersten Anfang wird dies

Evangelium nicht von einer Summe von

Individuen gepredigt und geglaubt, sondern von einer Gemeinschaft, die ursprünglich

durch die direkte Offenbarung des

Auferstandenen, dann durch den Glauben,

daß der Geist des Herrn in ihr fortlebt,

konstituiert wird.” Schwartz, Kaiser

Constantin und die Christliche Kirche, 17.

156. Schwartz, Kaiser Constantin und die Christliche Kirche, 18.

157. Epiphanius, Panarion 29, 3.7–4.3, in PG

41:393–96.

158. Source unidentified.

159. J. L. Teicher, “The Damascus Fragments and the Origin of the Jewish Christian Sect,”

Journal of Jewish Studies 2/3 (1951): 140.

160. Ibid.

161. “Der einzige noch lebende Herren verwandte, der sich auf eine

Sonderchristophanie berufen kann.” Ethelbert Stauffer, “Zum Kalifat des Jakobus,”

Zeitschrift für Religions- und

Geistesgeschichte 4/3 (1952): 212.

162. Ibid., 208.

163. Ibid., 206.

164. Ibid., 214.

165. “Das hohepriesterliche Sukzessionsprinzip.”

Ibid., 197–98, 207.

166. 127 Canons of the Apostles 1.17, in PO

8:661.

167. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.16.1–4, in PG

1:625–28; Numbers 12:14.

168. ἅτε ἱερεῖς, λευίτας, προέδρους, λειτουργοὺς θεοῦ, καθὼς ἐν βίβλῳ τῶν

Ἀριθμῶν γέγραπται περὶ τῶν ἱερέων ; καὶ γὰρ

ὁ λαὸς πρότερον θεοῦ λαὸς καὶ ἔθνος ἅγιον

ὠνομάζετο. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.25–

2.26.1, in PG 1:664.

169. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.25, in PG

1:664–65.

170. οὗτοι γὰρ εἰσιν ὑμῶν οἱ ἀρχιερειῖς· οἱ δὲ

ἱερεῖς ὑμῶν, οἱ πρεσβύτεροῖ καὶ οἱ λευῖται

ὑμῶν, οἱ νῦν διάκονοι, καὶ οἱ ἀναγινώσκοντες

ὑμῖν, καὶ οἱ ᾠδοί, καὶ οἱ πυλωροί, αἱ διάκονοι

ὑμῶν, καὶ χῆραι, καὶ αἱ παρθένοι, καὶ οἱ

ὀρφανοὶ ὑμῶν. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.25.18, in PG 1:665.

171. ὑμεῖς οὖν σήμερον, ὦ ἐπίσκοποι, ἐστὲ τῷ

λαῷ ὑμῶν ἱερεῖς λευῖται, οἱ λειτουργοῦντες

τῇ ἱερᾷ σκηνῇ, τῇ ἁγίᾳ καθολικῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, καὶ παρεστῶτες τῷ θυσιαστηρίῳ κυρίου τοῦ

θεοῦ ἡμῶν καὶ προσάγοντες αὐτῷ τὰς

λογικὰς καὶ ἀναιμάκτους θυσίας διὰ Ἰησοῦ

τοῦ μεγάλου ἀρχιερέως· ὑμεὶς τοῖς ἐν ὑμῖν

λαῒκοῖς ἐστε προφῆται, ἄρχοντες καὶ

ἡγούμενοι καὶ βασιλεῖς, οἱ μεσῖται θεοῦ καὶ

τῶν πιστῶν αὐτοῦ, οἱ δοχεῖς τοῦ λόγου καὶ

ἀγγελτῆρες, οἱ γνῶσται τῶν γραφῶν καὶ

φθόγγοι τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ μάρτυρες τοῦ

θελήματος αὐτοῦ, οἱ πάντων τὰς ἁμαρτίας

βαστάζοντες καὶ περὶ πάντων ἀπολογούμενοι.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.25.7, in PG

1:661.

172. ὡς οὖν οὐκ ἦν ἐξὸν ἀλλογενῆ, μὴ ὄντα

λευίτην, προσενέγκαι τι ἥ προσελθεῖν εἰς τὸ

θυσιαστήριον ἄνευ τοῦ ἱερέως, οὕτως καὶ

ὑμεῖς ἄνευ τοῦ ἐπισκόπου μηδὲν ποιεῖτε. εἰ

δέ τις ἄνευ τοῦ ἐπισκόπου ποιεῖ τι, εἰς μάτην

ποιεῖ αὐτό·; ὡς γὰρ ὁ Σαοὺλ ἄνευ τοῦ

Σαμουὴλ προσενέγκας ἤκουσεν; . εἰ οὖν ἄνευ

τοῦ πατρὸς ὁ Χριστὸς οὐ δοξάζει ἑαυτόν; .

προσήκει οὖν καὶ ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί, τὰς θυσίας

ὑμῶν ἤτοι προσφορὰς τῷ ἐπισκόπῳ

προσφέρειν ὡς ἐρχιερεῖ, ἢ δι᾽ ἑαυτῶν ἢ διὰ

τῶν διακόνων. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.27.1–3; 2.27.5–6, in PG 1:669–72.

173. τὴν κεφαλὴν αὐτῆς χρίσει ὁ ἐπίσκοπος, ὃν

τρόπον οἱ ἱερεῖς καὶ οἱ βασιλεῖς τὸ πρότερον

ἐχρίοντο. Constitutiones Apostolicae 3.15.3, in PG 1:797.

174. καὶ πάντα μὲν ὁ διάκονος τῷ ἐπισκόπῳ

ἀναγερέτω, ὡς ὁ Χριστὸς τῷ Πατρί῀ ἀλλ᾽

ὁσα δὲ δύναται, εὐθυνέτω δι᾽ ἐαυτοῦ, λαβὼν

παρὰ τοῦ ἐπισκόπου τὴν ἐξουσίαν, ὡς ὁ

Κύριος παρὰ τοῦ Πατρὸς τὸ δημιουργεῖν, τὸ

προνεῖν· τὰ δ᾽ ὑπερόγκα ὁ ἐπίσκοπος

κρινέτω. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.44.3, in PG 1:704.

175. δὸς ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί σου, καρδιογνῶστα θεέ, ἐπὶ τὸν δοῦλόν σου τόνδε, ὃν ἐξελέξω εἰς

ἐπίσκοπον, ποιμαίνειν τὴν ἁγίαν σου ποίμνην

καὶ ἀρχιερατεύειν σοι, ἀμέμπτως

λειτουργοῦντα; . δὸς αὐτῷ, δέσποτα

παντοκράτορ, διὰ τοῦ Χριστοῦ σου τὴν

μετουσίαν τοῦ ἀγίου πνεύματος, ὥστε ἔχειν

ἐξουσίαν ; λύειν δὲ πάντα σύνδεσμον κατὰ

τὴν ἐξουσίαν, ἣ ἔδωκας τοῖς ἀποστόλοις.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 8.5.6–7, in PG

1:1073.

176. Ordinationes episcoporum … exemplo prophetarum et regum … virtus invisibilis sancto chrismati est permista …

Hierosolymitarum … Jacobus … Domini

nuncupatus est frater, a Petro, Jacobo et Joanne apostolis est ordinatus, successoribus videlicet dantibus formam eorum …

reliquisque omnibus assensum praebentibus, ullatenus episcopus ordinetur. Anacletus, Epistola 2.1, in PG 2:802.

177. Si ergo Aaron filii, presbyterorum figuram gestabant, et Aaron summi sacerdotis, id est episcopi, Moyses indubitanter Christi

tenebat formam; quoniam fuit similitudo

mediatioris Dei, qui est inter Deum et

hominem Jesus Christus, qui est verus dux populorum, et verus princeps sacerdotum.

Anacletus, Epistola 2.4, in PG 2:810.

178. Damascus Document 13.9; 14.8–9.

179. A. Dupont-Sommer, The Dead Sea Scrolls: A Preliminary Survey (Oxford: Basil

Blackwell, 1952), 99.

180. “Le groupe ecclésiastique local s’est d’abord constitué et organizé sur le modèle

offert par les communautés juives.”

Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 11.

181. “Soit par imitation des synagogues, soit par la simple influence des besoins essentials à toute communauté, les premières chrétientés

se trouvèrent bientôt pourvues d’une

hiérarchie à trois dégreès. Cette hiérarchie tenait ses pouvoirs, directement ou

indirectement, des apôtres eux-mêmes. La

communauté désignait ordinairement les

personnes, mais l’investiture leur venait, soit de l’éveque local, soit, quand il s’agissait de cette fonction elle-même, de l’autorité

ecclésiastique supérieure, représentant la

succession des apôtres.” Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 10.

182. “Nulle part on n’y trouve un center religieux local, analogue à Jérusalem et à son temple.

Ce dernier trait, qui accuse si nettement la difference entre juifs et chrétiens, ne tarde pas, il est vrai, à disparaître.” Duchesne,

Origines du Culte Chrétien, 7.

183. “Zu jeder jüdischen Gemeinschaft gehören die Ältesten; noch in der hellenistischen und römischen Periode sind sie der Kern des

Synhedrions.” Schwartz, Kaiser Constantin und die Christliche Kirche, 24.

184. Constitutiones Apostolicae 8.20.1, in PG

1:1116–17.

185. “Vor allem das Judentum, die Liturgie der Synagoge.” Joseph Lechner, Liturgik des

römische Ritus, 6th ed. (Freiburg: Herder, 1953), 5.

186. Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 47–

48.

187. “Wenn auch die bisher genannten vor- und außerchristlichen Beeinflussungen den

kirchlichen Kult am augenscheinlichsten

mitgestaltet haben, so sind es durchaus nicht die einzigen oder letzten, und es ist

keineswegs ausgeschlossen, daß in der

Zukunft nicht auch andere Kultur- und

Volksbereiche unserer Liturgie, ältere Formen ausscheiden und daß diese Gestaltungen den

kirchlichen Kult wie einst den

abendländischen so nun ihn anderen Völkern

und Vorstellungen anpassen könnten.” Joseph Lechner, Liturgik des römische Ritus, 6.

188. Source unidentified.

189. Shepherd of Hermas, Liber Tertius qui inscribitur Similitudines 3.4, in PG 2:955–

58.

190. Reville, “Études sur les Origines de l’Épiscopat,” 285.

191. Solon, elegaic fragment 4, in T. Bergk, ed., Poetae Lyrici Graeci, 4th ed. (Leipzig: Teubner, 1882), 2:35.

192. Xenophon, Cyropaedia 8.2.10–14.

193. Diaconi, qui quasi oculi videntur esse episcopi in unaquaque civitate, iuxta

apostolorum constituta septem debent esse, qui custodiant episcopum praedicantem, ne aut ipse ab insidiatoribus quoque modo

infestetur, aut laedatur a suis, aut verba divina. Evaristus, Epistola 1.1, in PG 5:1047.

194. … oculi Domini. Alexander I, Epistola 1.1, in PG 5:1060.

195. Episcopi autem a Deo sunt judicandi, qui eos sibi oculos elegit. Pius I, Epistola 1.2, in PG 5:1121.

196. ὥσπερ οὖν ὑμεῖς σκοποί ἐστε, οὕτως καὶ

σκοπὸν ἔχετε τὸν Χριστόν. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.25.12, in PG 1:664.

197. πλὴν ἔστω ὁ διάκονος τοῦ ἐπισκόπου ἀκοὴ

καὶ οφθαλμὸς καὶ στόμα, καρδία τε καὶ ψυχή

; ὥσπερ ὁ Ἰοδὼρ τῷ Μωῢσῇ διετάξατο.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.44.4, in PG

1:704–5.

198. K. G. Goetz, “Ist der רקבמ der Genizafragmente wirklich das Vorbild des

christlichen Episkopats?” Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft und die

Kunde der älteren Kirche 30 (1931): 89–93.

199. Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 19–21.

200. 1 Clement 42.5.

201. τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν αὐτοῦ λάβοι ἕτερος.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 6.12.1, in PG

1:940.

202. ἕως οὖ ὁ Ὕψιστος ἀποστείλῃ τὸ σωτήριον

αὐτοῦ, ἐν ἐπισκοπῇ Μονογενοῦς. Testamenta Duodecim Patriarchorum 12.9, in PG

2:1148.

203. Benjamin of Tudela, The Itinerary of Rabbi Benjamin of Tudela, trans. and ed. A. Asher,

2 vols. (New York: Hakesheth, n.d.), 103.

204. Ibid., 163.

205. Polycarp, Epistola ad Philippenses 6.1.

206. “Man [hat] eine feste inhaltliche Bedeutung für das Wort ἐπίσκοπος nicht nachweisen

können… . Auch das Wort ἐπίσκοπος ist

demgemäss, genau so wie das Wort

ἀπόστολος, ein inhaltleeres Beziehungswort. ”

Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche, 107, emphasis in original.

207. Justin Martyr, Cohortatio ad Graecos 8, in PG 6:256–57.

208. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum 3, in PG

2:36–37.

209. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum 3, in PG

2:37.

210. Telesphorus, Epistola ad Omnes Universaliter Christi Fideles, in PG 5:1081.

211. ὅτι χρὴ τὸν ἐπίσκοπον εῖναι πεπαιδευμένον, καὶ ἔμπειρος τοῦ λόγου ; οὐκ ἔλλαττον ἐτῶν

πεντήκοντα. Constitutiones Apostolicae

2.1.1, in PG 1:593. [See Numbers 8:25.]

212. πρὸς τάς τινων ψευδαδέλφων εἰς πολλοὺς

ἐπιφεραμένους βλασφημίας; . ἔστι οὖν

πεπαιδευμένος καὶ ἔμπειρος τοῦ λόγου, καθήκων τῇ ἡλικίᾳ. Constitutiones

Apostolicae 2.1.1–2, in PG 1:596.

213. τοιοῦτον δὲ δεῖ εἶναι τὸν ἐπίσκοπον, μιᾶς

ἄνδρα γεγενημένον γυναικὸς μονογάμου ; εἰ

ἔστι σέμνος, πιστός, καὶ κόσμιος.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.2.2–3, in PG

1:597.

214. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.18.12, in PG

1:632.

215. ὅτι χρὴ τὸν ἐπίσκοπον φροντίζειν, ὅπως ὁ

λαὸς μὴ πλημμελῇ, διὰ τὸ εἶναι αὐτὸν

σκοπόν. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.18, in PG 1:629.

216. τουτέστιν, ἐπίσκοπον πρὸς ἐπίσκοπον

κρινῶ, καὶ λαῒκὸν πρὸς λαῒκόν, καὶ ἄρχοντα

πρὸς ἄρχοντα. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.19.1, in PG 1:633.

217. διὸ φευκτέον απὸ τῶν φωορέων ποιμένον.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.19.3, in PG

1:633.

218. Didache 11.11.

219. Didache 11.3–12.2.

220. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.20.9–11, in

PG 1:633–37.

221. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.20, in PG

1:633–37.

222. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.21.7–8, in PG

1:640–41.

223. Migne, PG 1:519–22.

224. ὁμόστοιχον ταῖς ἐνδόξοις φθογγαῖς αὐτοῦ.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 1.1, in PG 1:557.

225. εἰ γάρ περὶ τῶν κατὰ σάρκα γονέων φησὶν

τὸ θεῖον λόγιον· τίμα τὸν πατέρα σου καὶ τὴν

μητέρα σου, ἵνα εὖ σοι γένηται, καὶ ὁ

κακολογῶν πατέρα ἢ μητέρα θανάτῳ

τελευτάτω, πόσῳ μα·λλον περὶ τῶν

πνευματικῶν γονέων ὑμῖν ὁ λόγος

παραινέσει τιμᾶν αὐτοὺς καὶ στέργειν ; τοὺς

δι᾽ ὕδατος ὑμᾶς ἀναγεννήσαντας, τοὺς τῷ

ἁγίῳ πνεύματι πληρώσαντας, τοὺς τῷ λόγῳ

γαλακτοτροφήσαντας ; τοὺς τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν

λύσαντας. Constitutiones Apostolicae

2.33.1–3, in PG 1:680–81.

226. ὅσῳ τοίνυν ψυχὴ σώματος κρείττων, τοσούτῳ ἱερωσύνη βασιλείας. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.34.4, in PG 1:681.

227. καθότι καὶ ἐν τῷ δικαστηρίῳ συμψήφον

ἔξει καὶ συνίστορα τῆς δίκης τὸν Χριστὸν τοῦ

θεοῦ. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.47.2, in PG 1:708.

228. ὅταν δὲ συναθροίζῃς τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ

ἐκκλησίαν, ὡς ἂν κυβερνήτης νηὸς μεγάλης

μετ᾽ ἐπιστήμης πάσης κέλευε ποιεῖσθει τὰς

συνόδους, παραγγέλλων τοῖς διακόνοις

ὡσανεὶ ἂυταις τοὺς τόπους ἐκτάσσειν τοῖς

ἀδελφοῖς καθάπερ ἐπιβάταις μετὰ πάσης

ἐπιμελείας καὶ σεμνότητος. καὶ πρῶτον μεν ὁ

οἶκος ἔστω ἐπιμήκης, κατὰ ἀνατολὰς

τετραμμένος ; ὅστις ἔοικεν νηῒ´. κείσθω δὲ

μέσος ὀ τοῦ ἐπισκόπου θρόνος, παρ᾽ ἑκάτερα

δὲ αὐτοῦ καθεζέσθω τὸ πρεσβυτέριον, καὶ οἱ

διάκονοι παριστάσθωσαν εὐσταλεῖς τῆς

πλείονος ἐσθῆτος· ἐοίκασι γὰρ ναύταις καὶ

τοιχάρχοις. Constitutiones Apostolicae

2.57.2–4, in PG 1:724–25.

229. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.58.2, in PG

1:740.

230. Constitutiones Apostolicae 3.15, in PG

1:793–97.

231. ἐπίσκοπον προστάσσομεν χειροτενεῖσθαι

ὑπὸ τριῶν ἐπισκόπων· ἢ τὸ γοῦν ἔλλαττον,

ὑπὸ δύο·; πρεσβύτερον δὲ διὰ διάκονον ὑπὸ

ἑνὸς ἐπισκόπου, καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν κληρικῶν· ;

ἀλλὰ μόνον, τὸν μὲν πρεσβύτερον διδάσκειν,

ἀναφέρειν, βαπτίζειν, εὐλόγειν τὸν λαόν· τὸν

δὲ διάκονον ἐξυπηρετεῖσθαι τῷ ἐπισκόπῳ καὶ

τοῖς πρεσβυτέροις· τουτἔστι, διακόνειν· οὐ

μὴν καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ δι᾽ εὐεργεῖν. Constitutiones Apostolicae 3.20.1–2, in PG 1:804–5.

232. οὔτε ἐπίσκοπος ἀγνοίᾳ ἢ κακονοίᾳ

πεπιεσμένος ἔτι ἐπίσκοπός ἐστιν, ἀλλὰ

ψευδώνυμος, οὐ παρὰ θεοῦ, ἀλλὰ παρὰ

ἀνθρώπων προβληθείς. Constitutiones

Apostolicae 8.2.4, in PG 1:1068.

233. Σίλας μὲν οὖν καὶ Ἄγαβος ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν

προφητεύσαντες οὐ παρεξέτειναν ἑαυτοὺς

τοῖς ἀποστόλοις. Constitutiones Apostolicae 8.2.8, in PG 1:1068.

234. ὁ σοφίσας Ἔσδραν τὸν θεράποντά σου ἐπὶ

τὸ ἀναγινώσκειν τοὺς νόμους σου τῷ λαῷ

σου. Constitutiones Apostolicae 8.22.4, in PG 1:1120.

235. χήρα οὐ χειροτονεῖται ; ὡς Ἰουδὶθ καὶ Ἄννα

αἱ σέμνονται. Constitutiones Apostolicae 8.25.2, in PG 1:1121.

236. ἐπιταγὴν γὰρ κυρίου ουκ ἔχομεν.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 8.24.2, in PG

1:1121.

237. 127 Canons of the Apostles 1.1, in PO

8:574.

238. 127 Canons of the Apostles 1.13, in PO

8:584.

239. 127 Canons of the Apostles 1.23, in PO

8:592.

240. 127 Canons of the Apostles 1.24, in PO

8:593–94.

241. 127 Canons of the Apostles 1.26, in PO

8:595.

242. 127 Canons of the Apostles 1.59, in PO

8:643.

243. Adolf Deissmann, Light from the Ancient East: The New Testament Illustrated by

Recently Discovered Texts of the Graeco-

Roman World, trans. Lionel R. M. Strachan (New York: Doran, 1927), 213.

244. Ibid.

245. Justin, Apologia 1.65, in PG 6:428.

Tertullian source unidentified.

246. Meminisse autem diaconi debent quoniam

apostolos, id est episcopos et praepositos Dominus elegit, diaconos autem, post

ascensum Domini in caelos, apostoli sibi constituerunt episcopatus sui et Ecclesiae ministros. Cyprian, Epistola 65.3, in PL

4:408.

247. τὸν γὰρ Ἰακώβου θρόνον τοῦ πρότου τῆς

ἱεροσολύμων Ἐκκλησίας τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν πρὸς

αὐτοῦ τοῦ Σωτῆρος καὶ τῶν ἀποστόλων

ὑποδεξαμένον, ὃν καὶ ἀδέλφον τὸν Χριστοῦ

χρηματίσαι οἱ θεῖοι λόγοι περιέχουσιν.

Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 7.19.1, in PG 20:681.

248. Unus enim verus magister est, qui solus non didicit quod omnes doceret: homines

autem discunt prius quod doceant, et ab illo accipiunt quod aliis tradant. Ambrose, De Officii Ministribus 1.3, in PL 16:27.

249. Et etiam hoc nomen philosophorum tantummodo scholae aptum sit, an etiam in Scripturis reperiatur divines. Ambrose, De Officii Ministribus 2.4, in PL 16:34.

250. Source unidentified.

251. Unus enim verus magister est, qui solus

non didicit quod omnes doceret: homines autem discunt prius quod doceant, et ab illo accipiunt quod aliis tradant. Ambrose, De Officii Ministribus 1.3, in PL 16:27.

252. Sed ecclesiasticos viros, qui in lege Dei, die ac nocte meditantur, decipere non valent.

Jerome, Epistola 132.3, in PL 22:1149.

253. Non omnes episcopi episcopi sunt… . Non facit ecclesiastica dignitas Christianum.

Jerome, Epistola 14.9, in PL 22:353.

254. Scio de hac quaestione ab eruditissimis viris variae disputatum, et unumquemque pro captu ingenii sui dixisse quod senserat. Quia igitur periculosum est de magistrorum

Ecclesiae judicare sententiis, et alterum praeferre alteri, dicam unusquisque senserit, lectoris abritrio derelinquens, cuius

expositionem sequi debent. Jerome,

Commentariorum in Danielam Liber 9, in PL

25:542.

255. Anacreon, lyric fragment 348, in Bergk, Poetae Lyrici Graeci, 3:253–54.

256. τίνας γὰρ ἔχουσιν μιμήσασθαι οἱ πολλοὶ ἢ ; σε ; τὸν αὐτῶν ἄρχοντα, τοῦ Καίσαρος φίλον

καὶ ἐπίτροπον. Epictetus, Arrian’s Discourses of Epictetus 3.4.2–3.

257. πόλις ἄνδρα διδάσκει. Simonides, elegaic fragment 15.

258. Source unidentified.

259. “… seine Träger [bekleideten] zugleich die höchsten Staatsämter und damit im Senat

[spielten] die entscheideten Rolle.” Georg

Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Römer

(Munich: Beck, 1971), 480.

260. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Antiquitatum Romanarum 5.48.

261. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Antiquitatum Romanarum 6.96.

262. Livy, History of Rome 39.15; trans. George Baker, 5 vols. (New York: Harper and

Brothers, 1871), 5:24.

263. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Antiquitatum Romanarum 3.30.

264. Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum (Berlin, 1863), I, n. 1027.

265. Tuditanus nempe ille, qui cum palla et cothurnis nummos populo de rostris spargere solebat. Cicero, Philippicae 3.6.

266. Odit populus Romanus privatam luxuriam, publicam magnificentiam diligit … nec

candidatis ista benignitas adimenda est quae liberalitatem magis significat quam

largitionem. Cicero, Pro Murena 76.4–77.1.

267. Hugh Nibley, The Ancient State: The Rulers and the Ruled (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991), 152.

268. “Als Ersatz für die politischen Rechte, welche das Kaiserthum dem römische Volke

raubte, kann die Verpflegung Roms angesehen

werden, welche die Kaiser übernahmen; es

war nicht der Kriegsherr des römischen

Reiches … sondern vielmehr der mächtigste

Mann der Hauptstadt.” Viktor E.

Gardthausen, Augustus und seine Zeit, 2 vols.

in 5 (Leipzig: Teubner, 1891–1904), 1.2.587.

269. Victor Duruy, Histoire de Romains depuis les temps les plus reculés jusquà l’invasion des barbares, 7 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1879–

85), 5:432.

270. Scriptores Historiae Augustae, Alexander Severus Aelii Lampridii 28.7.

271. Sidonius, Letters 3.3.6, in The Letters of

Sidonius, trans. O. M. Dalton, 2 vols.

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1915), 1:69.

272. Possidius, Vita Sancti Augustini Episcopi 4, in PL 32:36–37.

273. “Noch die Formulare der päpstlichen Kanzlei, der ‘liber diurnus,’ dessen Redaktion man in den Anfang des VII. Jahrh. setzt,

pflegen nach der Erwähnung des Klerus

ausdrücklich Adel und Volk der Stadt Rom als Faktoren der Papstwahl zu nennen.”

Hermann Usener, “Das Verhältnis des

römischen Senats zur Kirche in der

Ostgothenzeit,” Kleine Schriften, 4 vols.

(Osnabrück: Zeller, 1965), 4:145.

274. Nuper siquidem ad nos defensor Ecclesiae Romanae flebili allegatione pervenit, cum apostolicae sedi peteretur antistes quosdam nefaria machinatione necessitatem temporis aucupatos ita facultates pauperum extortis promissionibus ingravasse, ut, quo dictu nefas est, etiam sacra vasa emptioni

publicae viderentur exposita. Cassiodorus, Historia Ecclesiastica 9.15, in PL 69:779.

275. 1 Clement 1.1, in PG 1:206.

276. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 7.30.8–9, in PG 20:712–13.

277. Source unidentified.

278. Sidonius, Letters 1.10.2, in Letters of Sidonius, trans. Dalton, 1:26.

279. Source unidentified.

280. “La population chrétienne s’éleva, dans chaque ville, de la situation de minorité

imperceptible à celle de minorité respectable; elle devint ensuite la majorité, puis

l’unanimité… . Le quatrième siècle vit à peu près partout les derniers actes de cette

transformation, au moins en ce qui regarde les masses populaires des villes.” Duchesne,

Origines du Culte Chrétien, 11.

281. “La masse était chrétienne comme le pouvait être la masse, de surface et

d’étiquette.” Louis Duchesne, Histoire

Ancienne de l’Église, 5th ed., 3 vols. (Paris: de Boccard, 1929), 3:5.

282. Tertullian, Adversus Gentes 38, in PL

1:528.

283. Philo, Quod Deus immutabilis sit 36 (176), and Philo, De Iosepha 6 (29).

284. Nicephorus, Epistola ad Leonem III papam, in PG 100: 173d–176a.

285. Heinrich Denzinger, Enchiridion Symbolorum Definitionum et Declarationum de Rebus Fidei et Morum, 31st ed. (Rome: Herder, 1957), items 468–69.

286. Ibid., item 466.

287. Norman H. Baynes, “Alexandria and Constantinople: A Study in Ecclesiastical

Diplomacy,” Journal of Egyptian

Archaeology 7 (1926): 146.

288. [πίστις] ἐστὶ μήτηρ πάντων ἡμῶν.

Polycarp, Epistola ad Philippenses 3.2–3, in PG 5:1008.

289. αὐτίκα γοῦν ὥσπερ ἐξ ἑνὸς φύντες πατρὸς, ἑνός τε θεοῦ οἷα παῖδες, καὶ μητρὸς μιᾶς τῆς

ἀληθοῦς εὐσεβείας. Eusebius, De Laudibus Constantini Oratio 16.7, in PG 20:142.

290. τὴν μητέρα ἡμῶν καὶ τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν

ἁπασῶν. μήτηρ μὲν γὰρ, οὐχ ὅτι τῷ χρόνῳ

πρεσβυτέρα μόνον ἐστίν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι καὶ ὑπὸ

ἀποστολικῶν ἐθεμελιώθη χειρῶν. John

Chrysostom, In Inscriptionem Actorum 2.1, in PG 51:77.

291. Horace, Carmen Saeculare 9–12.

292. Hyginius in Christi nomine almae urbis Romae episcopus. Hyginius, Epistola 1, in PG 5:1087.

293. “Du moment où le christianisme aspirait à embrasser l’Orbis Romanus tout entièr, il ne pouvait avoir d’autre capitale. Elle était

d’ailleurs comme consacrée par la predication et le martyre des deux plus grands apôtres… .

Rome, capitale de l’empire, siege de saint

Pierre, lieu sacré des apôtres, devient sans conteste la métropole de l’Église.” Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 14–15.

294. Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 14.

295. Duchesne, Histoire Ancienne de l’Église, 1:536–38.

296. τῆς δέ γε βασιλευούσης πόλεως ὁ μὲν

προεστὼς ὑστέρει διὰ γῆρας. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.7, in PG 20:1061.

297. Source unidentified.

298. “When a travelling apostolate, when the web of a far-flung correspondence both

proved inadequate, we hear during the latter half of the second century of the gathering of

bishops in councils.” Baynes, “Alexandria and Constantinople,” 146.

299. Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 17, 20, 24.

300. Duchesne says elsewhere they simply followed civil bodies. Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 12, 22.

301. “Au concile de Nicée, le groupement des évêques par provinces et leur subordination à l’évêque de la métropole civile sont déjà

choses acquises… . Les provinces visées par

le concile sont celles du temps, celles que

Diocletian avait formées en subdivisant les

anciennes.” Duchesne, Origines du Culte

Chrétien, 22.

302. Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 24; Duchesne, Histoire Ancienne de l’Église, 2:661–62.

303. ἐπειδὴ συνήθεια κεκράτηκα καὶ παράδοσις

ἀρχαῖα, ὥστε τὸν ἐν Αἰλίᾳ ἐπίσκοπον

τιμᾶσθαι, ἐχέτω τὴν ἀκολουθίαν τῆς τιμῆς τῇ

μητροπόλει σωζομένου τοῦ οἰκείου

ἀξιώματος. Council of Nicaea, Canon 7, in

Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les

Documents Originaux, 1:569.

304. “L’évêque placé à la tête de la métropole est également chargé du soin de la province, car, c’est à la métropole que se rendent tous ceux qui ont des affaires à traiter. En conséquence il a été réglé qu’il occuperait aussi le premier rang pour les honneurs et que les autres

évêques ne pourraient rien faire sans lui.”

Council of Antioch, Canon 9, in Hefele,

Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:717.

305. Source unidentified.

306. “Comme resorts d’une juridiction ecclésiastique supérieure à celle des

métropolitains et des conciles provinciaux.”

Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 24.

307. Baynes, “Alexandria and Constantinople,”

147.

308. Ibid.

309. Ibid., emphasis in original.

310. Ibid., emphasis in original.

311. Episcopi autem non in castellis aut modicis civitatibus debent constitui, sed presbyteri per castella et modicas civitates

atque villas debent ab episcopis ordinari et poni … . et, ut dictum est, non ad modicam civitatem, ne vilescat nomen episcopi, aut aliubi, sed ad honorabilem urbem titulandus et denominandus est. Anacletus, Epistola 3.2, in PG 2:812.

312. Provinciae autem multo ante Christi adventum tempore divisae sunt maxima ex

parte, et postea ab apostolis et beato

Clemente praedecessore nostro ipsa divisio est renovata. Anacletus, Epistola 2.4, in PG

2:807.

313. Ipsis quoque in civitatibus vel locis nostris, patriarchas vel primates, qui unam formam tenent, licet diversa sint nomina, leges divinae et ecclesiasticae poni et esse iusserunt, ad quos episcopi (si necesse

fuerit) confugerent, eosque appellarent, et ipse primatum nomine fruerentur, et non alii.

Anacletus, Epistola 2.4, in PG 2:807.

314. Anacletus, Epistola 2.4, 3.3, in PG 2:807–

8, 813.

315. Quia haec eadem et leges saeculi in suis continent principibus. Anacletus, Epistola

3.3, in PG 2:813.

316. Nuli archiepiscopi primates vocentur, nisi illi qui primas tenent civitates, quarum episcopos apostoli et successores

apostolorum regulariter patriarchas et

primates esse constituerunt … propter

multitudinem eorum, primatum constitui.

Anicetus, Epistola ad Galliae Episcopos 2, in PG 5:1131.

317. E. T. Merrill, Essays in Early Christian History (London: Macmillan, 1924), 262.

318. It is strange that though the Roman Catholic Church today explains this as meaning that he was a half brother or stepbrother, being the son of Joseph by an earlier marriage, none of the ancient sources uses any word for half

brother or stepbrother in describing James—

though there was no shortage of such words

in the old languages and people were careful and specific in designating family

relationships.

319. Si autem non minus quam a tribus apostolis tantus vir fuit ordinatus episcopus, patet profecto eos formam, instituente

Domino, tradidisse, non minus quam a tribus episcopis, episcopum ordinari debere.

Sed crescente numero episcoporum … debent etiam plures augeri, id est, si archiepiscopus dein obierit. Anicetus, Epistola ad Galliae Episcopos 1, in PG 5:1129–30.

320. ἴσχυε δὲ κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνο τοῦ καιροῦ μάλιστα ὁ

Εὐσέβιος, ὅτι κατὰ τὴν Νικομέδειαν ὁ

βασιλεὺς τότε διέτριβε. καὶ γὰρ ἐκεῖ τὰ

βασίλεια μικρὸν ἔμπρεσθεν οἱ περὶ

Διοκλετιανὸν ἐπεποίηντο. διὰ τοῦτο οὖν

πολλοὶ τῶν ἐπισκόπων τῷ Εὐσεβίῳ

ὑπήκουον. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 1.6, in PG 67:52.

321. “Vers l’an 42, Antioche a détrôné Jérusalem. Antioche apparaît comme la

métropole du christianisme naissant; c’est de là que les Apôtres répandent peu à peu

l’Evangile dans le monde.” Albert Dufourcq,

Histoire de la Fondation de l’Église: La Révolution Religieuse, 5th ed., L’Avenir du Christianisme 1 (Paris: Bloud, 1909), 220.

322. “La vraie raison, c’est que Milan était la residence impériale officielle, la capitale de

l’empire d’Occident. … Milan était ainsi … le grand center des relations ecclésiastiques

occidentals, et cela uniquement parce qu’elle était la capitale de l’empire.” Duchesne,

Origines du Culte Chrétien, 36.

323. “[Beaucoup d’églises] recouraient à Milan

… de préfèrence à Rome … uniquement

parce que Milan était plus voisine.” Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 37–38.

324. John Bligh, “The ‘Edict of Milan’: Curse or Blessing?” Church Quarterly Review 153

(1952): 307.

325. F. J. Badcock, The History of the Creeds, 2nd ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1938), 165–

79.

326. Nancy Lenkeith, Dante and the Legend of Rome, Mediaeval and Renaissance Studies, Supplement 2 (Leiden: Brill, 1952), 18.

327. “Plus qu’à Rome, plus que dans n’importe quels centres des vieilles monarchies de

l’Orient, la capitale importe.” N. Iorga,

Histoire de la Vie Byzantine: Empire et

Civilisation, 3 vols. (Bucarest: l’École Roumaine en France, 1934), 1:119.

328. “Constantinople fut toujours un peu un Kremlin.” Iorga, Histoire de la Vie

Byzantine, 1:120.

329. Andreas Alföldi, The Conversion of Constantine and Pagan Rome, trans. Harold Mattingly (Oxford: Clarendon, 1948), 110.

330. Ibid.

331. Ibid., 116.

332. Lenkeith, Dante and the Legend of Rome, 1–32.

333. “La cour du roi devint le centre des affaires ecclésiastiques comme de toutes les autres.”

Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 40.

334. Leges Romanas et Caesaris. Eleutherius, Epistola 2, in PG 5:1143.

335. Vicarius vero Dei estis in regno iuxta Prophetam regem … ut possis cum eo

regnare in aeternum, cuius vicarius estis in regno praedicto. Eleutherius, Epistola 2, in PG 5:1144.

336. Baynes, “Alexandria and Constantinople,”

147, emphasis in original.

337. “Les évêques de la capitale ne se contentèrent pas longtemps d’être les chefs

ecclésiastiques d’un seul diocèse.” Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, 24.

338. ὅτι οὐχ ἡ ἱερωσύνη τούτων αἰτία, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ

ἡμετέρα ῥαθυμία. John Chrysostom, De

Sacerdotio 3.10, in PG 48:639.

339. ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν μικροῦ δεῖν ἔμελλε γίνεσθαι, εἰ

μὴ ταχέως ἡμᾶς ὁ Θεὸς τῶν κινδύνων

ἐκείνων ἐξείλκυσε, καὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας τῆς

αὐτοῦ καὶ τῆς ἡμετέρας φειδόμενος ψυχῆς.

ἐπεὶ πόθεν, εἰπέ μοι, νομίζεις τὰς τοσαύτας

ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησίας τίκτεσθαι ταραχάς` ἐγὼ

μὲν γὰρ οὐδὲ ἄλλοθεν πόθεν, οἶμαι, ἢ ἐκ τοῦ

τὰς τῶν προεστώτων αἱρέσεις καὶ ἐκλογὰς

ἁπλῶς καὶ ὡς ἔτυχε γίνεσθαι. Chrysostom,

De Sacerdotio 3.10, in PG 48:647.

340. ὅτι γὰρ καὶ φόνων τὰς ἐκκλησίας

ἐνέπλησάν τινες, καὶ πόλεις ἀναστάτους

ἐποίησαν ὑπὲρ ταύτης μαχόμενοι τῆς ἀρχῆς.

Chrysostom, De Sacerdotio 3.10, in PG

48:647.

341. 1 Clement 1.1, in PG 1:206.

342. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 5.24, in PG 20:493–508.

343. Hugo Koch, Cyprian und der römische

Primat: Eine kirchen- und dogmengeschichtliche Studie, Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der

altchristlichen Literatur 5.1, 3rd ser. (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1910), 152.

344. Hugo Koch, Cathedra Petri: Neue Untersuchungen über die Anfänge der

Primatslehre (Giessen: Töpelmann, 1930), 179.

345. quod est episcopus episcoporum.

Tertullian, De Pudicitia 1, in PL 2:981.

346. This is only found in the notes of PL 4:1153

( Nemo se episcopum episcoporum

constituat). See also 4:1330.

347. Hugo Koch, Cathedra Petri, 47–58; Cyprian und der römische Primat, 53.

348. τῆς αὐτῆς ἀξιούμενος ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τιμῆς· καὶ

ἐρωτήσεις αὐτόν, ὦ ἐπίσκοπε, προσλαλῆσαι

τῷ λαῳ· λόγους διδακτικούς ; ἐὰν δὲ δι᾽

εὐλάβειαν, ὡς σοφός, τὴν τιμὴν σοι τηρῶν,

μὴ θελήσῃ ἀνενέγκαι, κἂν εἰς τὸν λαὸν

εὐλογίαν αὐτὸν ποιήσασθαι καταναγκάσεις.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.58.2–3, in PG

1:740.

349. Θεοῦ γὰρ εἶναι τὸ κριτήριον τῶν ἀληθεῖ

λόγῳ κρειττώνων καὶ τοῖς ἀσθενεστέροις δὲ

δεῖν ὑποκατακλίνεσθαι λόγῳ συγγνώμης ; ὡς

ἂν μὴ πρὸς ἀλλήλους στασιαζόντων.

Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.21, in PG

20:1081.

350. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.60, in PG

20:1131–32.

351. διαφερομένων τινῶν πρὸς ἀλλήλους κατὰ

διφόρους χώρας, οἷά τις κοινὸς ἐπίσκοπος ἐκ

θεοῦ καθεσταμένος, συνόδους τῶν τοῦ θεοῦ

λειτουργῶν συνεκρότει. Eusebius, Vita

Constantini 1.44, in PG 20:957–60.

352. ἐν μέσῃ δὲ τῇ τούτων διατριβῇ οὐκ

ἀπαξιῶν παρεῖναί τε καὶ συνιζάνειν, κοινωνὸς

τῶν ἐπισκοπουμένων ἐγίνετο; . καθῆστό τε

καὶ μέσος. ὡσεὶ καὶ τῶν πολλῶν εἷς,

δορυφόρους μὲν καὶ ὁπλίτας καὶ πᾶν τῶν

σοματοφυλάκων γένος ἀποσεισάμενος.

Eusebius, Vita Constantini 1.44, in PG

20:957–60.

353. ἔνθεν εἰκότως αὐτὸς ἐν ἑστιάσει ποτὲ

δεξιούμενος ἐπισκόπους, λόγον ἀφῆκεν, ὡς

ἄρα εἴη καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπίσκοπος, ὧδέ πη αὐτοῖς

εἰπὼν ῥήμασιν ἐφ᾽ ἡμετέραις ἀκοαῖς, Ἀλλ᾽

ὑμεῖς μὲν τῶν εἴσω τῆς Ἐκκλησίας, ἐγὼ δὲ

τὸν ἐκτὸς ὑπὸ θεοῦ καθεσταμένος, ἐπίσκοπος

ἄν εἴην. ἀκόλουθα δ᾽ οὖν τῷ λόγῳ

διανοούμενος, τοὺς ἀρχομένους ἅπαντας

ἐπεσκόπει, προὔτρεπέ τε, ὅσπερ ὂν ἡ

δύναμις. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 4.24, in PG 20:1172.

354. Necessarium mihi ac religiosum intellexi, ut nunc quasi episcopus episcopis mecum in Christo communicantibus salutaris ac fidelis sermonis colloquia transmitterem. Hilary, De Synodis 2, in PL 10:481.

355. Source unidentified.

356. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 4.24, in PG

20:1172.

357. John Morris, “Early Christian Orthodoxy,”

Past and Present: A Journal of Scientific History 3 (1953): 13.

358. Non omnes episcopi episcopi sunt… . Non facit ecclesiastica dignitas Christianum.

Jerome, Epistola 14.9, in PL 22:353.

359. καὶ ὁ μὲν Χριστὸς ἁλιεῖς καὶ σκηνοποιοὺς

καὶ τελώνας ἐπὶ ταύτην ἐκάλεσε τὴν ἀρχην·

οὗτοι δὲ τοὺς μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐργασίας τῆς

καθημερινῆς τρεφομένους διαπτύουσιν· εἰ δέ

τις λόγων ἅψαιτο τῶν ἔξωθεν καὶ ἀργῶν

τρέφοιτο, τοῦτον ἀποδέχονται καὶ

θαυμάζουσι. τί γὰρ δήποτε τοὺς μὲν μυρίους

ἀνασχομένους ἰδρῶτας εἰς τὰς τῆς ἐκκλησίας

χρείας παρεἶδον· τὸν δὲ οὐδέποτε τοιούτων

γευσάμενον πόνων, πᾶσαν δὲ τὴν ἡλικίαν ἐν

τῇ τῶν ἔξωθεν λόγων ματαιοπονίᾳ

καταναλώσαντα, ἐξαίφνης εἰς ταύτην

εἵλκυσαν τὴν τιμήν. Chrysostom, De

Sacerdotio 2.7, in PG 48:639.

360. αἰτίας οὐκ οὔσης, αἱ μέγισται τῶν

Ἐκκλησιῶν, καὶ ἐκ παλαιοῦ πρὸς ἀλλήλας

ἀδελφῶν τάξιν ἐπέχουσαι, αὗται νῦν

διεστήκασι. Basil, Epistola 204, in PG

32:756.

361. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 2.71, in PG

20:1044–45.

362. Source unidentified.

363. Source unidentified.

364. Sozomen, Historia Ecclesiastica 1.17, in PG 67:913.

365. Source unidentified.

366. Joseph Milner, The History of the Church of Christ (Edinburgh: Brown & Nelson, 1835), 169–70.

367. Eusebius, The Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius Pamphilus, Bishop of Caesarea, in Palestine, trans. Christian F. Crusé, 9th ed.

(New York: Stanford and Swords, 1850),

318; οἵ τε δοκοῦντες ἡμῶν ποιμένες τὸν τῆς

δεοσεβείας θεσμὸν παρωσάμενοι ταῖς πρὸς

ἀλλήλους ἀνεφλέγοντο φιλονεικίαις, αὐτὰ δὴ

ταῦτα μόνα, τὰς ἔριδας καὶ τὰς ἀπειλὰς τόν τε

ζῆλον καὶ το πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔχθος τε καὶ

μῖσος ἐπαύξοντες οἷά τε τυραννίδας τὰς

φιλαρχίας ἐκθύμω; διεκδικοῦντες. Eusebius,

Historia Ecclesiastica 8.1.8, in PG 20:741.

368. Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 374–75; Eusebius, De Martyribus Palaestinae 12, in PG 20:1511–14.

369. 127 Canons of the Apostles 2.16, in PO

8:671.

370. 127 Canons of the Apostles 2.18, in PO

8:671–72.

371. 127 Canons of the Apostles 2.22, in PO

8:673.

372. Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur propter justitiam. Zephyrinus, Epistola 2.1, in PG

10:45.

373. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 7.30, in PG 20:709–20.

374. τοῦτο οὐδέποτε ἠκούσθη ; παρόντων

ἐπισκόπων λαῒκοὺς ὁμιλεῖν. Eusebius,

Historia Ecclesiastica 6.19.17, in PG

20:569.

375. οὐκ ἀποδεχόμενοι μὲν τοὺς φιλάρχους, βιαζόμενοι δὲ τοὺς διὰ πολλὴν μετριότητα

τὴν κοινὴν φροντίδα τῆς ἐκκλησίας τοῦ θεοῦ

μὴ βουλομένους προπετῶς ἀναδέξασθαι. καὶ

οἰ καλῶς ἄρχοντες ἡμῶν βιασθέντες

ὑπάρχουσι, τοῦ μεγάλου βασιλέως

ἀναγκάζοντος, οὐ πεπείσμεθα εἶναι Υἱὸν

Θεοῦ, Λόγον Θεοῦ. Origen, Contra Celsum

8.75, in PG 11:1629–32.

376. Tertullian, De Pudicitia 21, in PL 2:1023–

26.

377. ὡς θεοῦ τύπον ἔχων ἐν ἀνθρώποις τῳ·

πάντων ἄρχειν ἀνθρώπων, ἱερέων, βασιλέων,

ἄρχόντων, πατέρων, υἱῶν, διδασκάλων καὶ

πάντων ὁμοῦ τῶν ὑπηκόων; . ὅτι ὑμῖν τοῖς

ἐπισκόποις εἴρηταῖ Ὃ ἐὰν δήσητε ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς

ἔσται δεδεμένον ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.11.1–2, in PG

1:612–13.

378. γνώριζε σεαυτόν. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.18.3, in PG 1:629.

379. δι᾽ οὗ τὸ ἅγιον πνεῦμα ἐν ὑμῖν ὁ κύριος

ἔδωκεν ἐν τῇ χειροθεσίᾳ, δι᾽ οὗ ἅγια δόγματα

μεμαθήκατε καὶ θεὸν ἐγνώκατε καὶ εἰς

Χριστὸν πεπιστεύκατε, δι᾽ οὗ ἐγνώσθητε ὑπὸ

θεοῦ, δι᾽ οὗ ἐσφραγίσθητε ἐλαίῳ

ἀγαλλιάσεως καὶ μύρῳ συνέσεως, δι᾽ οὗ υἱοὶ

φωτὸς ἀνεδείχθητε ; διὰ τοῦ ἐπισκόπου σου ὁ

θεὸς υἱοποιεῖταί σε ; στέργε, καὶ τὸν μετὰ

θεὸν γενόμενόν σου πατέρα σέβου.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.32.3–2.33.1, in PG 1:680.

380. μὴ κρῖνε τὸν ἐπίσκοπόν σου ἢ τὸν

συλλαῒκόν. Constitutiones Apostolicae

2.36.9, in PG 1:688.

381. ὅτι οὔτε βασιλείᾳ, οὔτε ἱερωσύνῃ θεμιτὸν

ἐπανίστασθαι; . εἰ γὰρ ὁ βασιλεῦσιν

ἐπεγειρόμενος, κολάσεως ἄξιος, κἂν υἱὸς ᾖ,

κἂν φίλος· πόσῳ μα·λλον ὁ ἱερεῦσιν

ἐπανιστάμενος. Constitutiones Apostolicae 6.2, in PG 1:912.

382. Episcopi autem a Deo sunt judicandi. Pius I, Epistola 1.2, in PG 5:1121.

383. Et sicut laici et saeculare homines nolunt eos recipere in accusationibus et

infamationibus suis. Telesphorus, Epistola ad Omnes Universaliter Christi Fideles 1, in PG 5:1082.

384. Non est itaque a plebe aut vulgaribus hominibus arguendus vel accusandus

episcopus. Evaristus, Epistola 2, in PG

5:1053.

385. Qui [episcopos] devorant qui oculi Domini dicuntur … esset reus criminiis

majestatis… . [Qui] accusandi episcopos …

quos non humanis, sed divinis actibus

mortuos esse scimus. Alexander I, Epistola 1.1, in PG 5:1060.

386. Pejus malum fore non aestimo quam Christianos suis invidere sacerdotibus… .

Non potest autem humano condemnari

examine, quem Deus suo reservavit judicio.

Si omnia namque in hoc saeculo vindicata

essent, locam divina non haberent judicia.

Alexander I, Epistola 1.2, in PG 5:1063.

387. Alexander I, Epistola 1.3, in PG 5:1063–

64.

388. [Episcopi] enim qui proprio ore corpus Domini conficiunt, ab omnibus sunt

audiendi, obediendi, atque timendi.

Telesphorus, Epistola ad Omnes

Universaliter Christi Fideles 3, in PG

5:1084.

389. Populus enim ab [episcopis] docendus est

… non ipsi ab eo. Telesphorus, Epistola ad Omnes Universaliter Christi Fideles 3, in PG 5:1085.

390. Telesphorus, Epistola ad Omnes Universaliter Christi Fideles 3, in PG

5:1085.

391. Oves enim pastorem suum non reprehendant. Plebs vero episcopum non

accuset… . Episcopi autem a Deo sunt

judicandi, qui eos sibi oculos elegit. Pius I, Epistola 1.2, in PG 5:1121.

392. Quicunque propriam uxorem … sine causa

… interfecti … publicam agat poenitentiam.

Et si … episcopo suo inobediens exctiterit, anathematizetur. Pius I, Etis, in PG 5:1127.

393. Rex dicitur a regendo, non a regno.

Eleutherius, Epistola 2, in PL 5:1144.

394. ὅτι φρικτὸν ἡ ἱερωσύνη, καὶ πολὺ τῆς

παλαιᾶς λατρείας ἡ καινὴ φρικωδεστέρα; . ὅτι

πολλὴ τῶν ἱερέων ἡ ἐξουσία καὶ ἡ τιμή.

Chrysostom, De Sacerdotio 3.4–5, in PG

48:642–44.

395. Chrysostom, De Sacerdotio 3.4–6, in PG

48:642–44.

396. διὸ χρὴ τὸν ἱερωμένον ὥσπερ ἐν αὐτοῖς

ἑστῶτα τοῖς οὐρανοῖς μεταξὺ τῶν δυνάμεων

ἐκείνων οὕτως εἶναι καθαρόν. Chrysostom,

De Sacerdotio 3.4, in PG 48:642.

397. Ego tyrannus appellor, et plus etiam quam tyrannus. Ambrose, Epistola 20.27, in PL

16:1044.

398. Quando audisti, clementissime imperator, in causa fidei laicos de episcopo judicasse?

… Si docendus est episcopus a laico, quid sequetur? Laicus ergo disputet, et episcopus audiat: episcopus discat a laico. Ambrose, Epistola 21.4, in PL 16:1046.

399. Quis est qui abnuat in causa fidei, in causa, inquam, fidei episcopos solere de imperatoribus Christianis, non imperatores de episcopis judicare? Ambrose, Epistola 21.4, in PL 16:1046.

400. Pater tuus … vir maturioris aevi, dicebat: Non est meum judicare inter episcopos; tua nunc dicit clementia: Ego debeo judicare.

Ambrose, Epistola 21.5, in PL 16:1046.

401. [Populi] aiunt: … vult Ambrosius posse, quam imperator. Ambrose, Epistola 21.30, in PL 16:1059.

402. Imperator enim intra Ecclesiam, non supra Ecclesiam est. Ambrose, Epistola 21.36, in PL 16:1061.

403. Judicio suo Deus servavit rem suam, et tamen vos passim irruistis in alienam,

corrumpentes omnium felicitatem. Nam quae major felicitas, quam Dei sacerdotes vivere, nec esse quod fuerant. Optatus, De Schismate Donatistorum 2.25, in PL 11:984.

404. Optatus, De Schismate Donatistorum 3.4, in PL 11:1006–13.

405. Cum haec ita sint, tu qui es profanus, ad

Dei domesticos, quare istam sumis in Dei sacerdotem auctoritatem? Lucifer, Pro Sancto Athanasio 1, in PL 13:826.

406. Quomodo dicere poteris, judicare te posse de episcopis, quibus nisi obedieris, jam, quantum apud Deum, mortis poena fueris

multatus? Lucifer, Pro Sancto Athanasio 1, in PL 13:826.

407. Quis es tu, inquam, qui tibi usurpasti hunc auctoritatem, quam tibi Deus non tradidit?

Lucifer, Pro Sancto Athanasio 1, in PL

13:827.

408. [ἔψευδε] δὲ σαφῶς (τί γὰρ οὐκ ἔμελλεν ὁ

κατὰ Χριστιανῶν). Eusebius, Historia

Ecclesiastica 6.19.9, in PG 20:568.

409. Proba te super nos factum judicem … cum probare non possis quia praeceptum sit tibi, non solum non dominari episcopis, sed et ita eorum obedire statutis, ut si subvertere eorum decreta tentaveris, si fueris in

superbia comprehensus, morte mori jussus sis. Lucifer, Pro Sancto Athanasio 1, in PL

13:826.

410. Lucifer, De non Parcendo in Deum

Delinquentibus 1, in PL 13:939.

411. See PL 13:826.

412. Tertullian, De Pudicitia 21, in PL 2:1023–

26.

413. Source unidentified.

414. Source unidentified.

415. “… le plus ancien des onze évêques présents.” Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:209.

416. “Qu’as-tu donc fait toi-même lorsque le curateur t’a demandé de livres les saintes

Écritures?” Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:210.

417. “Ils lui persuadèrunt [le président] de décider «que chacun rendrait compte à Dieu

de sa conduite dans cette affaire» (s’il avait, oui ou non, livré les Écritures).” Hefele,

Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:210.

418. Ut nullus episcopus alium episcopum inculcet. Council of Arles, Canon 17, in Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:547.

419. χωρεπισκόπους μὴ ἐξεῖναι πρεσβυτέρους ἢ

διακόνους χειροτονεῖν, ἀλλά, μηδὲ

πρεσβυτέρους πόλεως, χωρὶς τοῦ

ἐπιτραπῆναι ὑπὸ τοῦ ἐπισκόπου, μετὰ

γραμμάτων ἐν ἑτέρᾳ παροικίᾳ. Council of

Ancyra, Canon 13, in Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:314.

420. Council of Ancyra, Canon 15, in Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:316–17.

421. Council of Arles, Canon 18, in Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:320.

422. οἱ δὲ χωρεπίσκοπος εἰσὶ μὲν εἰς τύπον τῶν

ἑβδομήκοντᾶ ὡς δὲ συλλειτουργοὶ διὰ τὴν

σπουδὴν (τὴν) εἰς τοὺς πτωχοὺς προσφέρουσι

τιμώμενοι. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:334.

423. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:547.

424. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:550.

425. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:600.

426. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:604.

427. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:715.

428. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:717.

429. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:717–18.

430. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:719.

431. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:719–20.

432. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:720–21.

433. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:760–61.

434. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:761–62.

435. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:777–78.

436. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 2:1045.

437. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 2:1166.

438. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 2:1168.

439. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 2:1170–73.

440. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:170–72.

441. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:187.

442. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:187–88.

443. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:211.

444. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:220.

445. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:221.

446. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:228.

447. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:228.

448. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:229.

449. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:230.

450. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:252–53.

451. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:253.

452. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:262.

453. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:273.

454. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:275.

455. “Pour qu’il n’y ait plus dans le pays que des catholiques. D’accord avec le roi et les

grands, on prescript qu’à l’avenir tout roi qui montera sur le trône devra, sans compter ses autres serments, prêter celui de ne pas souffrir l’impiéte juive… . S’il ne tient pas ce serment, qu’il soit anathème et Maran-Atha devant Dieu et qu’il soit la proie du feu éternel.”

Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:279.

456. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:287.

457. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:295.

458. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:305.

459. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:306.

460. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:587.

461. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:589.

462. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:852.

463. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:927.

464. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:994.

465. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:994.

466. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:994.

467. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:1033.

468. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 5:400–401.

469. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 5:1329–33.

470. Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi, Crusade for Pan-Europe: Autobiography of a Man and a Movement (New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1943), 173.

471. “D’après Migetius, le pouvoir divin ne se trouvait qu’à Rome, seule d’Église romaine

était l’ Ecclesia catholica. Là tout était saint, tout était sans tache, à elle seule s’appliquent les paroles: «Tu es Pierre, et sur cette pierre, etc… .» Elipand croit au contraire que le

Christ dit cela de l’Église catholique tout

entière.” Council of Seville, in Hefele,

Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 3:987–88.

472. ἄλλως γὰρ οὐ δυνατὸν τὰ μεγάλα τῶν

σκεμμάτῶν, ἤ διὰ συνόδων. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 1.51, in PG 20:965.

473. δικαιότερον δὲ τὰ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς δρίνεσθαι μὴ

ἐξ ἑνὸς ἢ δευτέρου τῶν μὴ ὀρθοποδούντων

πρὸς τὴν ἀλήθειαν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν

κατὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην ἐπισκόπων

συνημμένων. Basil, Epistola 204.7, in PG

32:753.

474. οὐχ οἷόν τ᾽ ἦν ; εἰ μὴ εἰς ταὐτὸ πάντων

ὁμοῦ, ἢ τῶν γοῦν πλειόνων ἐπισκόπων

συνελθόντων. Eusebius, Vita Constantini

3.17, in PG 20:1073.

475. πᾶν γάρ, εἴ τι δ᾽ ἂν ἐν τοῖς ἁγίοις τῶν

ἐπισκόπων συνεδρίοις πράττεται, τοῦτο πρὸς

τὴν θείαν βούλησιν ἔχει τὴν ἀναφοράν.

Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.20, in PG

20:1080.

476. Source unidentified.

477. Batiffol, “Le Réglement des Premiers Conciles Africains et le Réglement du Sénat

Romain,” Bulletin d’Ancienne Littérature et d’Archéologie Chrétiennes (1913): 3.

478. Batiffol, “Le Réglement des Premiers Conciles Africains,” 4.

479. “Convoquer le concile se dit cogere concilium, qui rappele l’expression cogere senatum, convoquer le sénat. Et de même que senatum habere désigne l’action de tenir séance du sénat, ainsi tenir séance du concile se dit concilium habere. ” Batiffol, “Le Réglement des Premiers Conciles Africains,”

6.

480. “Les premiers mots de ce protocole sont

une imitation du protocole des procès-verbaux des séances du sénat romain.” Batiffol, “Le

Réglement des Premiers Conciles Africains,”

6.

481. “Soit à Carthage en 256 ou en 312, soit à Rome en 313, on ne concevait pas une

assemblée délibérant en forme autrement que

dans la forme consacrée par l’usage du

sénat.” Batiffol, “Le Réglement des Premiers Conciles Africains,” 18.

482. “Mais les théologiens ne sont pas d’accord pour decider s’ils sont d’institution divine ou d’institution humaine.” Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:2.

483. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:2.

484. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:2–3.

485. Sacerdotum judicium ita debet haberi.

Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:3.

486. Quod trecentis sanctis episcopis visum est not est aliud putandum, quam solius Filii

Dei sententia. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:3.

487. Agunutr praeterea per Graecias illa certis in locis concilia ex universiis ecclesiis per quae et altiora quaeque in commune

tractantur, et ipsa repraesentio totius

nominis Christiani magna veneratione

celebratur. Tertullian, De Ieiuniis 13, in PL

2:972.

488. ἄλλως γὰρ οὐ δυνατὸν τὰ μεγάλα τῶν

σκεμμάτων, ἢ διὰ συνόδων κατορθώσασθαι.

Eusebius, Vita Constantini 1.51, in PG

20:965.

489. πᾶν γάρ, εἴ τι δ᾽ ἂν ἐν τοῖς ἁγίοις τῶν

ἐπισκόπων συνεδρίοις πράττεται, τοῦτο πρὸς

τὴν θείαν βούλησιν ἔχει τὴν ἀναφοράν.

Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.20, in PG

20:1080.

490. οὔδε γὰρ ταὐτομάτου, ἀλλὰ θείῳ νεύματι, ὁ τῶν τοσούτων ἀριθμὸς ἐπισκόπων

συνεκροτήθη. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 4.12, in PG 67:492.

491. Source unidentified.

492. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les

Documents Originaux, 1:10–11.

493. πεῖραν λαβὼν ἐκ τῆς τῶν κοινῶν εἰπραξίας, ὅση τῆς θείας δυνάμεως πέφυκε χάρις,

τοῦτον πρό γε πάντων ἔκρινα εῖναί μοι

προσήκειν σκοπόν, ὅπως παρὰ τοῖς

μακαριωτάτοις τῆς καθολικῆς Ἐκκλησίας

πλήθεσι πίστις μία καὶ εἰλικρινὴς ἀγάπη,

ὁμογνώμων τε περὶ τὸν παγκρατῆ θεὸν

εὐσέβεια τηρῆται. ἀλλ᾽ ἐπειδὴ τοῦτ᾽ οὐχ οἷόν

τ᾽ ἦν ἀκλινῆ καὶ βεβαίαν τάξιν λαβεῖν, εἰ μὴ

εἰς ταὐτὸ πάντων ὁμοῦ ; αὐτὸς δὲ καθάπερ

εἷς ἐξ ὑμῶν ἐτύγχανον συμπαρὼν (οὐ γὰρ

ἀρνησαίμην ἄν, ἐφ᾽ ᾧ μάλιστα χαίρω,

συνθεράπων ὑμέτερος πεφυκέναι), ἄχρι

τοσούτου ἄπαντα τῆς προσηκούσης

τετυχηκεν ἐξετάσεως, ἄχρις οὗ ἡ τῷ πάντων

ἐφόρῳ θεῷ ἀρέσκουσα γνώμη, πρὸς τὴν τῆς

ἑνότητος συμφωνίαν εἰς φῶς προήλθη, ὡς

μηδὲν ἔτι πρὸς διχόνοιαν ἢ πίστεως

ἀμφισβήτησιν ὑπολείπεσθαι. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.17, in PG 20:1073.

494. οὐδεὶς οἷός τε ἢν ἀνθρώπων θεραπείαν

εὓρασθαι τοῦ κακοῦ, ἰσοστασίου τῆς ἔριδος

τοῖς διεστώσιν ὑπαρχούσης· μόνῳ δ᾽ ἄρα τῷ

παντοδυνάμῳ θεῷ καὶ ταῦτ᾽ ἰᾶσθαι ῥᾴδιον

ἦν, ἀγαθῶν δ᾽ ὑπηρέτης αὐτῷ μόνος τῶν ἐπὶ

γῆς κατεφαίνετο Κωνσταντῖνος· ὃς ἐπειδὴ τὴν

τῶν λεχθέντων διέγνω ἀκοήν ; τότε αὐτὸς

ἐαυτοῦ τὴν διάνοιαν ἀνανικήσας, ἄλλον

τουτονὶ καταγωνιεῖσθαι δεῖν ἔφη τὸν κατὰ

τοῦ ταράττοντος τὴν Ἐκκλησίαν ἀφανοῦς

ἐχθροῦ πόλεμον. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.5, in PG 20:1060, emphasis added.

495. οἷα Θεοῦ τις οὐράνιος ἄγγελος, λαμπρὰν

μὲν ὥσπερ φωτὸς μαρμαρυγαῖς ἐξαστράπτων

περιβολήν ἁλουργι·δος πυρωποῖς

καταλαμπόμενος ἀκτῖσι, χρυσοῦ τε καὶ λίθων

πολυτελῶν διαυγέσι κοσμούμενος. Eusebius,

Vita Constantini 3.10, in PG 20:1065.

496. ; τοὺς μὲν γοῦν πείθων, τοὺς δὲ

καταδυσωπῶν τῷ λόγῳ, τοὺς δ᾽ εὖ λεγόντας

ἐπαινῶν, πάντας τ᾽ εἰς ὁμόνοιαν ἐλαύνων.

Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.13, in PG

20:1069.

497. σπανίος αὖ ὁ τῆς ἀληθείας φίλος. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.21, in PG 20:1084.

498. ; ἐν μέρει μὲν ἐπισκόποις ὑπὲφ τῶν

ἐκκλησιῶν τοῦ θεοῦ τὰ πρόσφορα

διαταττόμενος. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 3.24, in PG 20:1084.

499. Source unidentified.

500. Sozomen, Historia Ecclesiastica 1.22, in PG 67:925.

501. Bligh, “The ‘Edict of Milan’: Curse or Blessing?” 311.

502. ἢ διὰ πειθοῦς τινος, ἤ, ἵνα ἀληθέστερον

εἴπω, κοσμικῆς δυναστείας. Socrates

Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 4.12, in PG 67:493.

503. Codex Carolinus, ed. W. Gundlach, Monumenta Germaniae Historica,

Epistolarum III (Berlin: Weidmann, 1892), no.

11, p. 506.

504. Tertullian, De Pudicitia 21, in PL 2:1023–

26.

505. διότι ἀφ᾽ οὗ χριστιανίζειν ἤρξαντο, τὰ τῆς

ἐκκλησίας πράγματα ἤρτητο ἐξ εὐτῶν, καὶ αἱ

μέγισται σύνοδοι τῇ αὐτῶν γνώμῃ γεγόνασί

τε καὶ γίνονται. Socrates Scholasticus,

Historia Ecclesiastica, preface to 5, in PG

67:565.

2

The Office of Bishop in the

Church in Rome

In Search of a Missing Link

Up until now, all discussion has been

confined to the church in general, and, where the case of Rome has been cited, it has only been by way of illustration. But for reasons that need no explaining, it is well to give

some special attention to a particular

bishopric whose claims were pushed with

ever-increasing insistence. Once there was a man who boasted of being a direct

descendant of Abraham Lincoln. To prove

his claim he would quote the Gettysburg

address with the flaming challenge: “Deny if you can that Lincoln wrote that!” No one

wants to deny it, we would tell such an one, but what has that got to do with your claims?

The Roman Catholics quote certain words of

the Lord to Peter, indicating that Peter was to become president of the church, and think

thereby that they have demonstrated not only Peter’s claim on the Lord, but through some

mysterious logic their claim on Peter, though the Lord said not a word about his

successors, let alone about the city of Rome.

The most undeniable proof that it is raining does not prove that it is Tuesday. What the

Roman Catholics have to prove is not that

the Savior bestowed office on Peter, but that Peter bestowed office on them; to date they

have thought to settle the whole question by endless repetition of the irrelevant “thou art Peter.”

Of course, intelligent Catholics recognize

the true issue. The greatest of all their

scholars in modern times, Louis Duchesne,

devoted his whole life to seeking for some definite tie between Peter and his church—

and failed to find it. Nevertheless, we are

assured, if Peter was to be head of a church, there surely was to be a church, and what more likely candidate than ours? Again they

make their point by assuming a thing that is not said or even hinted at in the scripture: that there would be a permanent church.

Irenaeus cites the case of Rome to prove that doctrinal teachings (nothing is said about

authority) were handed down from the

apostles, and he gives as the first bishops

Linus, Anacletus, and Clement, upon which

the learned editor (Masseutus) comments: “It is not our business to unravel the difficulties with which the problem of Peter’s

successors fairly swarms, both with regard

to succession and chronology.” 1 Now, we can overlook mountains of swarming

difficulties in Catholic doctrine, liturgy, and

priesthood once a fair case has been made for the beginning of the church. But if there is any area in which no difficulty or

contradiction may exist, in which, in fact, the slightest shadow or suspicion of a difficulty is enough to throw all final judgments into a state of permanent suspension, it is the

crucial moment on which all depends—the

fatal moment of transmission, not from Christ to Peter, but from Peter to his

successor. And that is precisely the moment

that “swarms” with difficulties! No other

moment is so laden with the future as that

moment; no other moment interests us quite

so much. The Romans are voluble enough in

telling us what happened before that moment

—a promise given to Peter—and what

happened after that moment—a proud line of

succession—but on what happened at that moment they not only preserve silence, but

forbid investigation.

We have said that the investigation of that moment was considered by Monsignor

Duchesne to be the special calling of his life, yet his biographer Henri Leclercq assures us that, after a certain time of his life, that was the one subject on which he would tolerate

no investigation and no discussion. 2 In 1952

the Knights of Columbus Foundation for the

Preservation of Historical Documents in the

Vatican Library invited the world to study its holdings from all periods of its magnificent history collection—except the fatal period of the beginning: “The documents which the

Church has been collecting for nearly twenty centuries include, of course, the

ecclesiastical records from the earliest

Christian era. These are housed separately in the Vatican archives and are not to be

microfilmed.” 3 Why not? What is wrong? If they supported Catholic claims, we would

long since have seen these documents

splashed on the covers of Life and Time—

but they are not even being microfilmed. The official reason given is painfully transparent:

“They are not of general interest to

scholars.” 4 A few minutes spent in the religious sections of the card catalogs of any of our great libraries will show that it is

precisely “the earliest Christian era” that is of overwhelming interest to scholars and the general public alike. Books in that limited

area far outnumber those in all the other

fields and periods put together. Obviously,

the disinterest of scholars is not the true

reason for keeping the documents of the early church undercover, while just as obviously

the true reason is that their release would be quite retrograde to Catholic interests.

Duchesne was not the first Catholic to

recognize that all depends on the great

moment of transmission of Peter’s power to

his successor. The importance of that

moment is dramatically pointed out in the significant collection of letters attributed to Clement in which he describes the

breathtaking event of the transmission of

world power in detail. The fact that these

letters are obvious forgeries and are yet

quite old and numerous shows that

churchmen fully recognized the need for

establishing historically the all-important

drama of the transmission.

The most serious attempt to explain how

the keys got from Peter to the next man—a

thing for which no provision is made in the

scriptures or anywhere else—is in the

famous Liber Pontificalis. The study of this source was the first great work of the

celebrated Duchesne, and he was still

engaged in its study when he died.

According to Leclercq, when friends asked

Duchesne why he did not renounce the

Catholic Church as a result of his studies, he

explained: “I have a mother in Brittany who is 102 years old with whom I make a retreat

for two months every summer. I would not

sacrifice the company of her and her friends for the satisfaction of being true to myself. ”5

A passage from Duchesne’s edition of the

Liber Pontificalis reads:

The blessed Peter … first sat on the throne

of the bishopric of Antioch for seven years.

This Peter having gone to Rome when Nero

was emperor there sat on the throne of the

bishopric for twenty-five years, two

months, and three days… . He ordained

two bishops, Linus and Cletus, who in his

lifetime performed all the tasks of the

ministry in the City of Rome, … leaving

Peter free to pray and preach and teach the

people… . He consecrated the blessed

Clement as bishop and committed to him

the throne or rule of all the church, saying:

“Just as the power of governing, binding,

and loosing was given me by the Lord Jesus

Christ, so I commit it to you… . Do not be

concerned with the things of this world, but seek to devote yourself to speaking and

preaching to the people.” 6

No wonder the good Monsignor had his

doubts. One hardly knows where to begin

with the contradictions in the passage. Peter is bishop of Antioch before being bishop of Rome. His call was that of an apostle—a

missionary bearing witness to all the world

—yet he must stay put “sitting on the throne”

in one city’s bishopric for seven years and in another for twenty-five. Since the office of a bishop is not like that of an apostle at all, it is necessary to have Peter transfer all his episcopal duties to two other men who

function as bishops while he goes about the

work of an apostle. With the appointment of

Clement we then have no less than four

bishops active in Rome during the lifetime of Peter. We are told that Peter went to Rome

“when Nero was emperor there,” yet Peter is

supposed to have been put to death under Nero. Nero was only emperor for fourteen

years, yet here we are told that Peter

flourished at Rome for twenty-five years,

outliving by eleven years the Nero who

presided at his execution. Jesus Christ gives the power of government to Peter, but not to Clement—it is Peter who does that. Here we

have a principle of horizontal succession;

power is passed from hand to hand, not

bestowed directly on men by God, but given

by one man to the next. But not only does the present pope not choose and ordain his

successor, but no one is allowed to so much

as even hint at a possible successor as long as a pope is still alive. Today the

transmission of the office is through the

college of cardinals, an institution that did not exist until the twelfth century.

Questions about the Account of the

Ordination of Clement as a Bishop There are many versions7 of the spurious letter of Clement “To James the lord and

bishop, and bishop of bishops, ruler of the

holy church of Christians in Jerusalem and of the churches founded by God’s foresight and

will belonging to Jesus Christ everywhere.” 8

In all of these letters, Clement is “the third after Peter to sit on the great throne of

Rome.” 9 “Peter, feeling the approach of death, called all the Roman brethren together and appointed Clement their head: ‘I transmit to him [he says] the power to bind and loose, etc. Until that time Peter had reserved these powers to himself.’ ” 10 Yet we are told that Cletus and Linus had already “sat on the

great throne of Rome”; did they not already

have that authority? If not, the presidency of the church is something quite apart from the bishopric of Rome. Where did it reside?

Note that Clement must write to James at Jerusalem, without whose approval his

ordination is invalid. Note also that it is

James who is called “the ruler of the holy

church of Christians in Jerusalem and of the churches … everywhere.” In every letter

Peter makes Clement promise “that when I

die you write a letter to James, the Lord’s

brother, telling him how close you have been to me… . Let James be assured that after my

death the seat will be occupied by a man not uninstructed in nor ignorant of the doctrines and the canons of the church.” 11 Could anything be further from the calling of a

prophet? Clement is a good man with the

proper experience—that is all. There is not a word about any manifestations or visions. In a similar crucial situation, Peter got a direct revelation from heaven (Acts 10:9–16), but

with this version of the launching of the

church there is nothing but a personal

endorsement with the specific statement of all of Clement’s qualifications, and they are qualifications such as one would ask of any

administrator, no more.

“Saying these things to the multitude,

Peter, in the presence of everyone, laid his hands upon my head,” writes Clement, “and

made me sit down in his own chair, saying to me: I charge you as soon as I die to send a

letter to James, giving him your entire life history and all your experience with me right down to the present moment… . He will be

very pleased to learn that after me will come a man not untaught nor ignorant of the life-giving words, and especially instructed in

the laws of the church, to assume the

teacher’s chair.” 12 What an amazing transfer of supernatural power—what a Pentecost!

“Tell James not to worry because a well-

trained man has taken my place. ”13 But why didn’t Peter dictate the letter to James on the

spot? It is typical of Roman Catholic claims that Clement himself is supposed to write the letter after Peter is dead, informing James

that he, as a close personal friend and

apprentice of the apostle, has now taken over the rule of the entire church: It is the old Roman failing of self-anointment. Peter was

alive (he died a martyr, not of sickness,

though the Clementine letters seem to forget that), and yet he rested the whole problem of succession on a letter that not he but Clement himself was to write after Peter’s death. If Clement were to be made head of the whole

church, why did not Peter personally consult with or at least inform James and John, both of whom were still alive? He wants James

“to be assured.” Why, then, doesn’t he write James himself? Why wait until he is dead to

notify the other apostles and make the

explanations that he does not hesitate to give to the multitude at Rome?

The ordination of Clement as described in the records is, to say the least, highly

irregular. It was always the rule that a bishop should only be ordained by at least three

other bishops, for “we know that the most

blessed James, who was called the brother

of the Lord, was ordained bishop of

Jerusalem by Peter, James, and John”;

therefore no bishop should claim ordination

by less than three. 14 Yet the same Peter, who with James and John established this oft-repeated precedent, now ordains his

“successor” without even letting his fellow

apostles know what is being done. In one

letter Peter says to Clement: “I know I am

giving you a hard thing—bad treatment and

ingratitude at the hands of the uneducated

mob.” Is that the way to describe the Roman

Church in its purest beginning, and is that the way to describe the highest calling on earth?

15 “I need you,” Peter continues, “in the time

of crisis and danger.” But he admonished the new bishop to have nothing at all to do with the temporal affairs of the church. Temporal affairs, he explains, are the concern of

presbyters and deacons, yet, as he describes them, the qualifications for these officers are exactly identical with those of a bishop. 16

The invincible opposition between the

functions of a bishop and an apostle still

make trouble.

“The bishop must be the hardest-working

worker on the ship,” Peter continues,

forgetting that he has just said the whole of Clement’s work is to be teaching and prayer, joyful activities to say the least. 17 He said,

“In transmitting to you this office I am doing myself a favor, not you.” 18 Here the head of the church is not merely choosing one to

succeed him after his death, he is actually

stepping down, shifting his burden to other

shoulders. “If most of the brethren hate you

because of your justice, their hatred cannot hurt you.” 19 The worrisome danger to the church, he continues, comes from within.

What a picture of the primitive church, and

in the days of Peter, no less. Of course

Clement blushes in the best schoolboy

manner when Peter orders him to sit on his

throne, places his hands upon his head in the presence of all the people, and says to him:

“I charge you in the presence of all these

people that when I die you write a letter to James, the Lord’s brother, telling him how

close you have been to me from the very

first, observing all my activities everywhere and listening to my sermons. Let James be

assured that after my death the seat will be occupied by a man not uninstructed in nor

ignorant of the doctrines and the canons of

the church.” 20 What an ordination! What language and behavior from one possessing

all the keys of heaven and earth! “And may

the Lord be with you now and forever, even as he said to us when he was about to be

taken to his God and Father, ‘Behold I am

with you always until the completion of the

time.’ ” 21 This is clearly the transmission of a blessing understood to have been given not to all the world, but explicitly to the apostles only.

But even if these letters were really

primitive, which they obviously are not,

since they are of the style and vocabulary of the fourth century, there is a fact that

invalidates any claims they might have to

special and unique authority by Clement’s

successors: The Clement story duplicates in

every detail the earlier and much better

authenticated story written by the same

Clement of how Peter ordained one

Zacchaeus bishop of Caesarea. 22 Carl Schmidt concludes his study of the subject

saying: It is my firm conviction “that the

homilist created this section [ Homiliae Clementinae 3.59–62] independently in order to fill in an emerging void caused by

the loss of the original, disputed material.” 23

In the Homiliae Clementinae account, 24 the bishop of Caesarea (1) is ordained by Peter, (2) mounts the throne of Peter, (3) is hailed by Peter as vicar of Christ, and (4) sits on the throne of Christ, which is, according to Peter, analogous to the judgment seat of

Moses. 25 Numerous modern scholars have maintained that the Caesarea episode was

borrowed from the epistle of Clement to

James, and certainly it is not likely that

bishops would be ordained in such a manner

by Peter.

Finding (or Not Finding) the Bishop

(or Bishops) of Rome

“If we ask who were the most important

people in the Christian church in the first

generation, the answer undoubtedly is, the Apostles and Prophets,” writes Kirsopp

Lake. “If we go on farther, and ask who is

the most important person in the church at

Rome at the end of the second century, the

answer unquestionably is that it was the

Bishop. But the difficulty comes when we

inquire how this change took place; for that is precisely the problem to which no

undoubted or unquestionable answer can be

given.” 26 Yet that is “precisely the problem”

to which an undoubted and unquestioned

answer must be given if the Roman claim is

to have any validity at all. (Note that

Professor Lake says that the bishop of Rome

enjoys supreme importance at an early date

at Rome, but nowhere else.)

But the Roman bishop lists from that

period are in a hopeless condition. The

Liber Pontificalis explicitly states that Peter

“ordained two bishops, Linus and Cletus,

who should be present in Rome for the carrying out of all sacerdotal ministration for the benefit of the populace or any who

should repair thither. But the blessed Peter himself devoted all his time to prayer,

preaching, and teaching the people. ”27 Here we have it: the administration of the city

bishopric of Rome is a full-time job for at

least two men. Even the mighty Peter cannot

fill that office and at the same time perform the spiritual functions of an apostle. Linus and Cletus are both bishops with specific

instruction to be present in Rome, for the office of bishop is that of an overseer who

must remain present on the spot. That leaves Peter free to go elsewhere, which, as a

general authority, he must. Next, according to the same source, Peter made Clement the

bishop, though the names of Linus and Cletus appear before his “because they were

ordained bishops by the prince of the

apostles himself. ”28 Counting Peter, that makes, as we have noted, no less than four

bishops in Rome at once.

But in the Apostolic Constitutions,

actually a much earlier text, Peter is

represented as saying, “Of the church of the Romans first Linus the son of Claudius was

ordained by Paul, and then after the death of Linus, Clement was ordained by me, Peter,

being the second one.” 29 Here we have apostles ordaining bishops in Rome as they

did elsewhere, but not acting as bishops

themselves at all. Certainly no one claims

that Paul was bishop of Rome. Both he and

Peter outlived at least one bishop of Rome,

and when he was dead they appointed his

successor. Here we see Clement not as the

successor of Peter and Paul at all, but of

Linus, who was of course no successor to the apostles, for they outlived him. Conflicting lists of early Roman bishops are given in the

fifth volume of the Patrologiae Graecae. 30

The most recent official Roman Catholic list, as given by Heinrich Denzinger, is: Petrus

Apostolus, (?)–67(?), sub cuius nomine

exstant duae epistolae canonicae; Linus, 67(?)–79(?); (Ana)cletus, 79(?)–90(?);

Clemens I, 90(?)–99(?). Then the epistle to

Corinth is quoted. All succeeding bishops of Rome have question marks after their dates

until Callistus I, 217–22. 31 (This is bad, and Giovanni Battista Pighi duly omits the

question marks, though his dates differ from Denzinger’s.)32 In Denzinger’s list, Clement succeeds to the throne about the year 90(?), with Peter about thirteen years before. By

that, all our pious letters describing how

Peter ordained Clement his successor when

he felt the approach of death are worthless.

The oldest Roman bishop lists, according

to Carl Schmidt, simply follow Irenaeus,

who had no original sources to follow. The

reason for the lack of documents was that “in Rome they bothered themselves very little

about the past, and therefore the collection could only be a very scanty one. ”33 This unconcern with the past has been noted by

others, including Eusebius, and such an

attitude could not possibly have been

inherited from an apostolic foundation that

looked forward to continued existence.

Cardinal Baronius rhapsodizes over the

exquisite care with which the apostolic

Christians preserved such relics as the

swaddling clothes of Christ for the blessing of future ages—that should have been the mood of the early church, but it was not. The earliest mention of Peter as bishop of Rome

is in Epiphanius, Adversus Octaginta

Haereses 41.1, who is wildly guessing, like the others, for he calls both Paul and James bishops of Rome. 34

Of course the slipup is pardonable, for

Paul came to Rome before Peter and is said to have been killed on the same day. That

means that he was longer in Rome than Peter

—how could he live and function there as an

apostle without being bishop? Plainly there

were authorities higher than bishops in the

church, for Paul installed bishops

everywhere. As for James, haven’t we seen

that he was submissively addressed by

Clement of Rome as “bishop of Rome as

well as of Jerusalem.” 35 If we accept Epiphanius along with the letter of Clement, we have no less than six bishops of Rome

operating at once. This is, of course, the

result of the disastrous assumption that the highest officers in the church must be

bishops.

To make things more confusing, Eusebius,

after a thorough search of the records, says that “Clement the third bishop of Rome was

a fellow worker of Paul” 36 and became

bishop after Anacletus had been bishop for twelve years, following Linus, who had been

bishop for twelve years, also “after the death of Peter and Paul.” 37 It is a relief to read Eusebius’s explanation that “it is not

easy to say who of these were the legitimate ones, recognized of worthy in zeal and

capable of shepherding the foundations [of

the apostles]; except for a few hints in Paul, we have nothing to go on. He had countless

fellow workers, whose names are

immortalized in the scripture.” 38 For the rest, the records by the fourth century were

already silent. From a study of all the lists of bishops (which appear first in the fourth

century), Erich Caspar can maintain that

“until the first third of the third century, they are typical fabrications of chronographers

devoid of the slightest documentary value,

and the possibility of laying down certain

dates for the Roman bishops thus appears

much later than even critical investigation has hitherto assumed.” 39 The first date that can be considered nearly certain is that of

Pontiarus, A.D. 235.

“If Peter ever came to Rome,” writes

Maurice Goguel, “which cannot be denied in

view of the total ignorance of what became

of him after his sojourn at Antioch, his

presence there left no direct or deep

memories.” 40 This is a most significant fact, and its significance is only pointed up by

Goguel’s amusing effort to explain it:

Whether he was there for too short a time

or because the church was already too

strongly organized there to have been

strongly influenced by a new arrival, a

generation after his death Clement of Rome

has nothing precise to say on the subject,

and if it was later claimed that he founded

the Roman community and was its first

bishop, etc., that was certainly not because other documents were discovered in the

meantime which were not known to Clement. We must be content with the ideas

of the simple operation of popular

imagination. 41

The idea of Peter’s arrival occasioning no

flurry at all in Rome, so well-founded was

the church there, is amusing, but the complete silence of the early records regarding any

activity at all of Peter in Rome is a serious thing.

After Peter leaves Antioch, the apostle

drops out of sight. We all know the legend of his martyrdom at Rome, but what about the

twenty-five years during which this mighty,

dynamic, towering prophet and high priest is supposed to have governed the affairs of the church from Rome? The Patrologiae

Graecae contains two stout volumes of the writing and doings of Clement, 42 who was bishop for ten years at most and who regards Peter as one infinitely above him. Clement

depicts a dynamic, wise, simple, honest, world leader in Peter—a powerful and

straightforward speaker, a man of action and immense popular appeal. Compared with

him, Clement himself is a midget. But if we

turn to the oldest traditions for Rome, it is all of Clement that we hear and never of Peter.

Where are his sermons, his miracles, his

intimate conversations, the delightful stories of his simple personal habits with which the Clementine writings abound as long as

Peter is in Palestine? As soon as he leaves there, Clement too loses sight of him. That

has made it possible for a number of

contemporary scholars to maintain that Peter never went to Rome at all, though there is no reason for doubting it. If he did go to Rome, the silence of the record is even more

significant. The record makes it plain enough that he did not govern the church from there, for he could not have done much in Rome

without its being noted and remembered at least as well as were his exploits elsewhere.

Strife over the Elections of the Bishop

of Rome

The complete absence of any clear

principle of succession at Rome is loudly

attested by the immense strife and confusion that attended the election of bishops in that city, especially during the fourth century.

About A.D. 220 the double election of

Callistus and Hippolytus led to a serious

schism in the city, and the trouble was not

settled until 235. Next came a schism

between Cornelius and Novatus. Eusebius

regards it as a shocking irregularity that

Novatus should insist that there should be

only one bishop in Rome at a time. In 354

Liberius was ordained thirty-fourth bishop of Rome, but the emperor wanted one of his

own men in the position and made it an issue

of doctrine to install his friend Felix. The people had elected Liberius, however, and

were so insistent that the emperor recalled

him to preside in Rome as joint bishop of

Rome with Felix. But popular

demonstrations continued, and the circus

resounded with the shout of thousands who

repeatedly exclaimed, “One God, One

Christ, One bishop!” 43 It was not enough for the emperor to accept the submission of

Liberius and reinstall him: “His rival was

expelled from the city by the permission of

the emperor and the power of the opposite

faction; the adherents of Felix were

inhumanely murdered in the streets, in the

public places, in the baths, and even in the churches; and the face of Rome, upon the

return of the Christian bishop, renewed the

horrid image of the massacres of Marius and

the proscriptions of Sylla.” 44

Even worse trouble arose a few years

later with the ordination of the next bishop of Rome, Damasus, whose election was

challenged by the bishops, who elected a

rival, Ursinus. The partisans of Ursinus

entered a church in which “the Damasian

part of the populus had assembled and perpetrated the cruelest killings against those of both sexes.” 45 When Damasus became bishop, writes Socrates, rioting instantly

broke out all over Rome because the

preceding bishop had chosen not Damasus

but Ursinus to be his successor. 46 “So all the people rose in arms against each other, not

because of any doctrine or heresy, but purely and simply over the issue of who was

authorized to sit in the episcopal throne.” 47

Plainly there was still no definite rule of

succession. “From that,” Socrates continues,

“arose the symplegades”—the mighty

rushing together of the mobs. 48 In the melee many were killed, and a great many of both

clergy and laymen were sentenced by the Eparch Maximus so that Ursinus finally gave

up and his followers quieted down. As in the preceding cases, it was the emperor’s favor

alone that decided the issue—a civil officer putting an end to the trouble.

The next papal election brought on another

crisis, reported by a contemporary,

Ammianus: Under Theodoric, “Symmachus

and Laurentius being both consecrated,

fought for the episcopal throne of Rome. By

God’s decree, Symmachus, being worthy of

the office, was victorious.” 49 That is a significant principle of succession, for the barbarians who were ruling at the time—and

Theodoric and Ammianus were both

barbarians—firmly believed in trial by duel: that the winner of a ritual combat was chosen of God. They now apply that principle to the election of the Roman bishop, though it does not seem very apostolic. Later, another

Symmachus, a deacon, became bishop of Rome, being “consecrated by a crowd of

deacons,” says Theophanes, “from which

came rioting, killing, and plundering in the city, which lasted for three years.” 50

Before that, however, an attempt was

made to establish something like a rule to go by in determining the solution to the question that had not been answered—namely, not

who was Christ’s successor, but who was

Peter’s. There was no sure way of

determining. Theodosius the Great

nominated Felix IV, he in turn named

Boniface II to be his successor, and Boniface chose one Vigilius to follow him. But

Boniface was not strong enough to get

Vigilius accepted, and the result was a

Senatus consultum, i.e., a law passed not by the apostles, but by the Roman Senate

governing the election of popes. (This was

followed by the Edict of Athalaric on the

election of popes.)51 So Boniface petitioned the emperor for help, and in reply the

emperor issued this edict: “When two

bishops of Rome are elected, neither shall be bishop, but only that one shall remain on the apostolic chair whom the doom (Ordeal) of

God and the Will of the Generality have

chosen from among the clergy by a new

ordination.” 52 Soon after, however, the Will of the Generality discovered that Boniface

had been acting treasonably with the Gothic

enemy and deported him to Greece, setting

up Vigilius as bishop in his stead. Then one Matalius challenged the ruling bishop and

had him assassinated. In 799, the relative of the blessed Pope Hadrian I stirred up the

people; they revolted against Pope Leo III,

won the victory, and blinded him.

In the Middle Ages the trouble of popes

and counterpopes became really deadly. We

need not retell the story of the Babylonian

captivity. Two less familiar accounts may serve as illustrations of what happened in a church that had been left strangely

unprovided with the means of implementing

that injunction which it has come to regard as the very essence of its being. On the eve of the First Crusade, Pope Urban II found his

claim challenged “by a certain adversary

named Guidbert,” who had been elected

pope by the Imperial party in 1061. Guidbert was “goaded on by pride,” writes Fulcher of

Chartres, a contemporary and secretary to

the French king, who was supporting Urban

against the emperor and his Honorius. “He

addressed himself to the confusion of the

populace” and got a large following,

though the larger and holier part of the

populace followed Urban, rightly elected

and consecrated by cardinal bishops. But

Guidbert, with the support of the

aforementioned emperor and inspired by the

unrighteous backing of the greater part of the citizens of Rome, as long as he could,

kept Urban away from the monastery of the

blessed Peter. But he being thus driven out

of the church, went about in the country,

holding popular meetings everywhere for

God; Guidbert, however, puffed up with

pride at having become the prince of the

church, showed himself a pope prone to

favor those who strayed … condemning the

acts of Urban as illegal. So Urban in that

same year in which the Franks began to

pass through Rome on their way to

Jerusalem, got complete control of the

apostolic power thanks to the aid of the

most noble matron Matilda [this was the

stepsister of the Emperor Henry III, who

gave all her holdings in Lorraine and Italy as a present to the Roman church, which she

was supporting against Henry IV]. Guidbert

was in Germany. So now there were two

popes, but a very great number of people

did not know which one they should obey,

or to whom they should turn for instruction

in the matter, or who could cure the disease. 53

Seven centuries before, Eusebius had used

these very words to describe the state of the church when the bishops were then in a

deadlock—the question is still unsolved in

the eleventh century (he found the solution in the emperor). Exactly like Eusebius, Fulcher continues: “Some favored the one man, some

the other. As far as human intelligence could judge, Urbanus was the juster, since he was

the less given to lust for money.” 54 Then he tells how Guidbert, as archbishop of

Ravenna, had lost his throne through greed.

He was especially in the wrong for having

seized “the sceptre of God’s empire, which

of course is not to be taken by force but

should rather be received with fear and

devotion. It was no wonder that the whole

world was disquieted and stirred up, since if the Roman Church, in which resides the

principle for the correction of universal Christianity, is confounded by any

disturbance, it instantly affects all the

members subject to her, the disease

spreading from the head through the fibers to the whole organism, which becomes sick and

weak… . And when the head is thus

afflicted, then all the members suffer

continually.” 55 Early fathers tell us that the apostles took good provision that while the

church lasted, the offices would be properly transmitted. Plainly this rickety system is

something entirely different. “The head

having thus been wounded, the members

withered from the pain that attacked them, so that in all parts of Europe, peace, goodness, fides went under, both within the churches and without, by great as well as small, and

suffered an eclipse. Hence it was necessary

… to transfer against the pagans that war

which they were waging against

themselves.” 56 And that, according to Fulcher, our best authority, is the reason for the First Crusade: A complete spiritual,

economic, moral, and political collapse

resulting from Roman rule, and the main

cause of trouble was the lack of any rule of papal succession.

When they got to Rome, they naturally

went to the basilica of the blessed Peter.

Fulcher was there: “When we went in,” he

reports, “there before the altar we found the men of Guidbert, the silly [ stolidus] pope standing with swords in their hands before

the oblations on the altar; others crawled up along the rafters and while we were

prostrate in prayer threw rocks down at us.

For whenever they spotted anyone faithful to Urban, they wanted to kill him. But one of

the towers of the same monastery was held

by men of Lord Urban, who, faithful to him,

had guarded it tenaciously, resisting all

attackers to the best of their ability. We had our share of pains for getting involved in that sort of thing.” 57

The following is an excerpt from Sir John

Froissart:

About this period, he who signed himself

pope Urban the sixth, came from Rome to

Genoa. … All England was obedient to him,

both church and commonalty, and now

more than ever because the king of France

and that country were Clementists. Urban

(whom the English and several other

countries obeyed), during his residence at

Genoa, sought how he could obtain succors

from England to annoy the king of France;

and I will tell you by what means. He was

to send his bulls to the archbishops and

bishops of the country, to proclaim that he

absolved, and would absolve, from all crime

of fault, every one who would assist in the

destruction of the Clementists. He had

heard that his adversary Clement had

resorted to this means in France, and was

daily doing so; and that the French called the Urbanists, as to matters of faith, dogs, which those resorted back on the

Clementists, whom Urban was very

desirous of condemning to the utmost of his

power, and he knew that he had no other

means of hurting them but through the

English. It was necessary, however, that he

should have a considerable sum of ready

money, if he wished to put his plans into

execution; for it was well known that the

nobles of England would not, for all the

absolutions in the world, undertake any

expedition, unless such were preceded by

offers of money. Men-at-arms cannot live

on pardons, nor do they pay much attention

to them except at the point of death… .

[Urban] sent upwards of thirty bulls to

England, where they were received with

much joy. The prelates preached up in their

dioceses this expedition in the manner of a

croisade; and … none of either sex thought

they should end the year happily, nor have

any chance of entering paradise, if they did

not give handsomely to the expedition as pure alms. At London, and in that diocese,

there was collected a large Gascony tun full of money, and he who gave most, according

to the pope’s bull, gained the greatest

number of pardons. All who should die at

this time, and who had given their money,

were absolved from every fault. 58

A churchman, Henry Spenser, bishop of

Norwich, was chosen to lead the expedition;

he was “young and eager, and wishing to

bear arms” and was all for conquering all of Flanders, but the experienced Sir Hugh

Calverly reminded him:

Sir … our expedition has nothing to do

with what concerns the wars of kings, but is solely pointed against the Clementists. We

are the soldiers of pope Urban, who has

given us absolution from all faults if we

destroy the Clementists. Should we march

into Flanders … we shall forfeit our

engagement; for, I understand, that the earl

of Flanders and all the Flemings are as good Urbanists as ourselves. 59

But in a rage the good bishop overruled

him that there should be good pickings in

Flanders, for “in the country I have named …

they have never been harassed by the war.”

So the expedition went forward and, as the

issue between the two popes was not settled, it continued with their successors, in whose days the Turks threatened Europe and took

all the Balkans: “[The Turks] only [laughed]

at the two popes, one at Rome and the other

at Avignon, saying, ‘The two gods of

Christendom are waging war against each

another, by which their government is

weakened and easier to be destroyed.’ ” 60

When the Christian princes asked the king

of Armenia why he would willingly submit

to the Turk Amurat, the king explained that

the Turkish rule over subjects was far more

decent, generous, and humane than anything

one met with in Christian lands. 61

About this period, Otho of Brunswick

came to pope Clement at Avignon to receive

his pay for the war he had carried on for the pope and church against the Romans and

Bartholomew Prignano, who styled himself

pope Urban VI… . [But as he] could not

obtain one penny … [he] left them much

discontented… . About this time, the forces

subsidized by pope Clement … had shut up

pope Urban in the city of Perugia, [where]

Count Conrad, a leader of a large body of

Germans, would have delivered him up to

pope Clement for [the sum of 20,000

crowns]. [But Clement could not raise the

money so] the siege was slackened on both

sides, and Urban escaped … to Rome.62

Froissart here enters a discourse upon the

fall of the church and the feudal nobility,

whom he describes as utterly cynical and

corrupt: he tells of a reforming friar who

prophesied true things and was locked up for

his pains and gives an amazing account of the donation of Constantine, but the burden of his story is that the church and the nobility are a single organism: clergy and aristocrats must band together against the common people,

who are of another order of being. 63

Froissart keeps repeating that the nobility

alone have broken their part of the contract, while the story he tells is all of how the

churchmen broke theirs.

The Establishment of an Episcopal

Hierarchy and College of Cardinals

What determined the papal succession for

a thousand years? In whose hands did the

office reside? Depending on circumstances,

the office was in the hands of a French or

English king, an Austrian emperor, a

Milanese duke, a rich banking family, a city mob, an ambitious woman, a successful

general, an intriguing churchman—who

could tell? The bishops from the largest cities naturally played a leading role. They came to be known as cardinal bishops, and

as such they first played an important role in public affairs in the twelfth century. This

college of cardinals at that time took over the functions of the regular synods, which

ceased to be held regularly. “More and more

it became the custom,” writes Martin

Souchon, “for popes to seek the counsel of

this college in matters of faith, the

administration of bishoprics, monasteries,

and church lands, and, finally, in questions of foreign policy; in this it became increasingly common to call upon the services of

individual cardinals. By 1300 the cardinals

had so firmly established their privileged

positions as advisors of the pope” that they began to think of themselves as having

official sanction and position. 64

The Constitutio de Sede Apostolica

Vacante (24 May 1882) states that “in the course of time, it has come about that these laws concerning the election of the Roman

pontiff have imperceptibly increased in

number and variety … to such an extent that

it now appears no small labor to discern

which rules are to be observed in electing

the highest pastor. So we have sought out

those rules which venerable age has

sanctified, albeit some of them have suffered change.” 65 The Constitution contains the interesting provisions that (1) “while a seat is vacant, the college of cardinals shall have absolutely no power or jurisdiction at all …

but holds all merely in reserve for the future pontiff.” 66 The cardinals do not, thus, have apostolic power delegated to them, but it

automatically falls on whomever they

choose. (2) “The college of cardinals has no power to dispose of the laws of the apostolic chair.” 67 (3) “No law passed by the popes

can be corrected or changed in any way while the church is without a pope.” 68

(4) But if questions persist the college has power to settle them by a majority vote. 69

Number 4 is a concession to hard reality that completely conceals the beautiful theory of

number 3: it is the cardinals who have the

power after all, though of course there is not the slightest suspicion of anything apostolic about their calling. (5) In an emergency, any matters can also be settled by a majority vote of the cardinals. 70 Further down the list of provisions, (12) “The highest cardinals all

keep their offices when a pope dies.” 71 But (23) “all authority of the congregations is that granted them beforehand by a living

pope.” 72 That is natural enough since originally the cardinals were only his

personal friends and advisors.

But Christ and the apostles had the

authority to bestow upon their fellow

workers offices akin to those they themselves held. The cardinals receive no

such office. The formula in which a cardinal casts his vote is significant, in view of the fact that he has no authority at all, save that of voting: “I testify before Christ the Lord, who has designated me, that I elect one who

should by the judgment of God be elected.” 73

A thousand years after Nicaea the church

discovered that a one-man organization

could not provide a dependable succession

and hit upon the idea of a council of men.

This is exactly what the primitive church had in the Twelve Apostles, but at that late date the sacred college could not and did not

pretend to be apostolic in origin. What better indication that the primitive church had been taken away? For plainly, the old traveling

apostolate, with prophets, teachers, etc., did not vanish because it had been found

inadequate—it was far more adequate than

any other system ever devised. It was not because of changing needs and conditions as

the “infant church outgrew old institutions”

that they were abolished—for when they left, not a stronger church, but only an empty gap remained, which was quickly filled with

swarms of impostors, claims and

counterclaims, charges and countercharges,

riots and assassination—in a word, darkness

and confusion.

The establishment of an episcopal

hierarchy was, as we have seen, from the

bottom up, not from the top down. It was

agreed that the largest cities should be the most important bishoprics and enjoy higher

honor and greater glory than the others. It

was claimed that the apostles, in establishing this, simply repeated what the state had done before, following, as it were, a law of

nature. This argues the absence of any real

ruling head in the church. The great cities

who claimed first place and constantly harped upon the theme of priority and

precedence would have had to buck the

whole church—not just each other—had they

been usurping the claims of an established

head. The whole controversy never takes the

form it must have taken had such a head

existed from the time of the apostles. The

emperor reiterated the old principle of the

perfect equality of bishops in his closing

speech to the Council of Nicaea when the

biggest cities claimed greater authority than the others. They watched as a group with the closest jealousy lest any one of their number should think to claim for himself an office

superior to the rest, for once a hierarchy of bishops was established, the principle of

equality was preserved as strictly as ever

within the hierarchy. And at the very top of the system stood the four or five biggest

churches, never just one. That was a thing

that no bishop would allow—unless, of course, his church was the one. But in such

cases the others would promptly gang up

against him in the name of Christian equality

—the ambitions of any one bishop could

always be countered with appeal to a

principle, not the authority of the ruling

bishop but the principle of episcopal

equality.

The Roman Role and the Big Four

It is interesting to see the game that Rome

plays in this system. When at the Council of Trent in the sixteenth century, “Lainez, in the name of the whole fraternity, proclaimed …

that the government of the faithful had been committed by Christ to the pope alone, that

in the pope alone all sacerdotal authority

was concentrated, and that through the pope

alone priests and bishops derived whatever

power they possessed,” the French and

Spanish bishops were shocked and angered. 74 Throughout all the Middle Ages the absolute ascendancy of one bishop over

the rest had never been accepted. The

Romanists have attacked the problem from

various angles, and their strained logic

proclaims their dearth of evidence. Thus

Karl Joseph von Hefele finds the one

passage that definitely proves Roman

priority, the statement by Socrates referring to the Synods of Antioch: Speaking of Julius of Rome, Socrates says, “nor did he send a

representative, though there was an

ecclesiastical canon that the churches could not pass a general order in council without

consulting the opinion of the bishop of

Rome.” 75

This is a passage in which much rests on

translation, so we have followed Hefele’s

own interpretation of canonizing : “To pass a general decree through and at synods.” 76 The

meaning of the passage is clear: the synods, not Rome, are passing laws, and those laws

which are of universal and general

application must be approved by all—as

long as the bishop of Rome withholds his

vote, the legislation is stopped. The Roman

bishop, like an obstructionist senator on a

committee, could hold up legislation

indefinitely, and so, in a literal sense, the whole business waited upon his pleasure.

But that does not prove, as Hefele insists,

that Rome was running things: it was the

meeting that was passing the laws, not Rome, and all that was needed of Rome was to send

a representative—not to preside; so much

Socrates states specifically.

Rome was the western representative of

the Big Four, “governing a very large number of churches in the West,” Duchesne surmises,

“without interposition of metropolitans”—

exactly, Duchesne observes, as Alexandria

did in the East. 77 Rome’s position is thus not unique, but certainly is very important, and if a law was to apply to the whole church, the

bishop of Rome would of course have to be

consulted. Many a time a single U.S. senator has for a moment held almost dictatorial

power, but for one finding himself in such a position to claim that he is therefore the

legitimate ruler of the land—being elected

de furia and holding his power de facto—

would be the height of presumption. The

meeting could not pass general rules without the vote of Rome; neither could it without

Alexandria or Antioch. The Roman bishop in

his position of western counterweight, much

farther removed from the other three than

they were from each other, enjoyed a

position of detachment. When the others

were deadlocked, as they often were, it was

for Rome to tip the scales—of course in the

way that pleased Rome. Accordingly, the

other three usually played up to Rome, and this enhanced the impression that Rome was

really running things. Rome was no more

determined nor skillful in pushing claims to priority than the others, but Rome by

geographical position held a better hand.

The Roman bishop appears in the West as

more imposing, aggressive, and magnificent

than the others, which makes it hard for the student of Western history to doubt that here we have something really and essentially out of the ordinary. But let that student turn his attention to Asia and the methods and

manners of the Roman bishop immediately

appear in another light—everything about

him then proclaims him to be not a unique

phenomenon in the world, but rather a

typical member of the Big Four. It never

occurred to Athanasius, Duchesne says, “that an appeal to the bishop of Rome might

strengthen his fortunes” when he was cast out

of his bishopric.78 Yet it was on the strength of παρῥησιαυτκοῑς γράμμασιν from Julius of

Rome that Athanasius and Paulus resumed

their bishoprics.79 Now parresiatikos means, literally, “speaking aside,” or

“outside”; “irregular order”; “bold,”

“unauthorized”; and parresiatikos

grammasin means “on one’s own authority.”

The bishop of Rome was simply taking a

chance; as the word shows, his proposal was

entirely irregular and was in fact not used

again in the controversies of the fourth

century. This was the last resort for

Athanasius, not the first resort, as would be the case if it were a regular solution. It was also something of an innovation, since

originally the idea had never occurred to

Athanasius.

In the same aggressive spirit, Liberius of

Rome writes to the Macedonian bishops that

the Arians must be eliminated “either by

persuasion or, to put it more plainly

[ alethesteron—to blurt out the truth], by temporal force.” 80 It is all very well to speak of Christian principles, but the bishop of

Rome knows that truth is with the big

battalions. To support the historic claims of Rome, Denzinger quotes at length the claims

made by the Roman bishops of the fourth

century that they had their authority from

Peter81—as if such proclamations bore any weight at all where the question is not

whether such claims were made as early as

the fourth century but whether those claims

were valid, which is another thing entirely.

It was the equality of the city bishoprics

that made it necessary for the emperor to act as common umpire and made it possible for

him to do so without shocking or annoying

anybody and without a word of protest from

any churchmen anywhere. The church agreed

to this in theory as well as in fact, says

Duchesne, and not a voice was raised in protest.82 Cyril writes to the emperor Constantius, “May God strengthen thee, and

the common association of the holy

churches,” and he illustrates the case of the Roman government, describing that monarch

as “the common bond of the holy churches,

the glorious guarantor of the Roman

government,” adorned by his acts of

umpireship in major cases concerning the

faith. 83 Tertullian was caustic and scathing concerning the completely unauthorized

claims comparing the Roman leader to “the

bishop of bishops.” 84 Cyprian was even more cutting, so much so that Catholic

divines have found it convenient to declare

the most unflattering letters as forgeries

(though as documents they are as well

attested as any of the other letters) “since it is unthinkable that anyone should use such

language against the pope.” 85 It is indeed

unthinkable, and for that very reason it is clear that Cyprian did not for a moment

consider the bishop of Rome to be the pope.

To use some passages of Cyprian to support

Roman claims, it becomes necessary for

Karl Adam to make of Cyprian himself a

complete scatterbrain ( Wirrkopf), as Hugo Koch allege s. 86

Rome was able to capitalize not only on

her geographical position, but also on what

Andreas Alföldi calls “the involuntary

reverence … for the Roman past,” which

gave the guardians of the great tradition other opportunities of flying the old flags before the eyes of the peoples of the empire. 87 “The development of the tradition of Peter at

Rome and the importance of the conclusion

based on it,” writes Goguel, “ran so exactly parallel to the development of the role of the church of Rome and to the increase of its

authority, that one is obliged to conclude that

there was an organic relation between the two; the tradition of Peter was affirmed and developed at the same time the expression

and justification of the claims of Rome

developed hand in hand.” 88 Professor Pierre Batiffol has labored with characteristic

determination to show that the expression

prima cathedra in Canon 58 of the Council of Elvira refers to the Roman See,89 while Adolf Jülicher was able to point to many

examples of the use of the expression in

reference to other churches. 90 Batiffol would have summan martyrii sublimitatem in Cyprian Epistle 69:4 mean “the highest peak

of martyrdom,” but Hugo Koch showed its

use to refer to martyrdom in general. 91

To prove the primacy of Rome, Victor

Martin asks the question, “Is there upon the earth a qualified instance of an accusation

against the Roman pontiff?” 92 For his answer he cites the fact that “already in 495 St.

Gelasius declares that in all cases the See of Rome is qualified to pass on all cases, and

that no one has the authority to modify its

decisions. ”93 This is the earliest instance Martin can find of such a claim—the very

end of the fifth century—and it comes from

the Roman bishop himself, which is not the

least surprising. The fact that the claim of St.

Gelasius was inserted into an imperial

decree of a hundred years earlier illustrates well the methods employed to establish in

retrospect the antiquity of claims that could not be proven, a system of skullduggery

culminating in the False Isidorian Decretals.

“The legal fiction arose,” says Eduard

Schwartz, “that the apostles and Paul had

placed monarchical bishops in all the

churches founded by them and gave them in

an unbroken line of succession … the true

apostolic doctrine… . Soon after this was

generally accepted, the bishop lists of the

large churches were composed and filled out by working backward to the apostles.” 94

Long before John Chrysostom had written,

Antioch—the oldest and greatest of all the

churches, the community to which the name

Christian was first applied—was beyond

any doubt the mother church. Chrysostom

was transferred to be bishop of

Constantinople and found New Rome and

Old Rome competing for priority of holiness.

He wrote that Constantinople is greater than Rome.

A city is not to be judged by its buildings.

Don’t tell me of the enormous size of the

city of Rome [this obviously being the

common boast], but show me rather an

obedient population [Rome had an

unenviable reputation of rowdyism in

electing its bishops]. The angels visited

Abraham in his hut rather than in the towers of Sodom. Go into the church at

Constantinople and see the fine quality of

the city—the prayers that never cease, day or night; the vast numbers of the poor at

their devotions. Great city, indeed, but also the metropolis of the empire. How many

bishops and teachers come there to be

taught! 95

You cannot judge truth by numbers, cries

Athanasius, as the poor, simple, ignorant

apostles were the equal of ten thousand times ten thousand. “Thus the power ever resides

with the truth, even though it is found among but few.” It is the man who cannot give his

reasons who flees to the support of numbers.

“Can you overcome falsehood by a

multitude, which is bought by flattery and

gifts, easily impressed in its ignorance and stupidity, easily tripped up in its timidity and cowardice, which always prefers the

pleasure of the moment to the enjoyment of

eternal life; all these things are well enough known. The strength of falsehood is in a

multitude.” 96 It is no wonder that modern Catholic editors want to view these remarks

of Athanasius as spurious.

The opposite side of this picture is the

argument of John Bligh: “Although there is

obvious wisdom in delaying the baptism of

men whose conduct is likely to bring

disgrace upon the Christian name, the Church is not the sort of society that can restrict its membership merely in order to be more

select.” 97 Father Bligh forgets that ekklesia means “select.” He would be hesitant to

baptize rascals only if that would hurt the

reputation of the church—he shuns public

disgrace, but apart from that would have no

limitations at all: big membership is more

important than what the membership stands

for. In the end, Optatus, Lucifer, Augustine, Jerome, Ambrose—all the great ones of the

fourth century—rest their final argument on

the size of their church. Had Rome been an

ordinary city, the claims of the bishop of Rome would be far more impressive than

they are, for then they would stem from

ecclesiastical office and position alone. As it is, the weight of Rome was so

overwhelmingly political and especially

cultural, that, in view of the close identity of a bishop’s importance with that of his city, one is surprised that the Roman See was not

rather far more important than it was. There is nothing the Roman bishops do or claim

that one would not normally expect from the

bishop of the most important city in the

world. Their claims are not out of proportion to those made by bishops of other cities;

bishops of the largest cities and of the

capital as a matter of course put forth

identical claims, which from the third

century on bear no weight at all in proving

the apostolic nature of one church or another.

Yet the earliest Roman claims date from the

fourth century.

The Double Apostolate: Peter and

Paul

When cities started appealing to their

apostolic foundation as proof of superior

merit, the principle of equality was

surmounted by the useful fiction of the

“double apostolate.” All the earliest

churches had been founded by apostles, so

on that ground they were equal. But in an age in which numbers were everything, a neat

and mechanical application of the rule of

numbers to this problem was inevitable:

what could be more obvious than that an

office bestowed by two apostles was twice

as valid as an office bestowed by one! At the Council of 381 in Constantinople appeared

the doctrine of the three thrones of Peter:

Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch. How then

could Rome claim to be superior through

Peter? In no other way but by the addition of another apostle, Paul, to establish the claim of double apostolate. Damasus explains that

Alexandria has second place and Antioch

third because Peter lived in those places, but Rome has undoubtedly the first place

“because Peter and Paul, dying there on one

and the same day equally consecrated the

above said church of Rome to Christ the

Lord. ”98 This is speculation unlimited. It destroys the Clementine claims, and it

introduces principles of authority that are

nowhere mentioned in scripture or in the

fathers, but that undoubtedly would give

Jerusalem, with its triple apostolate and its consecration by the Lord’s own death,

overwhelming priority.

“I Paul and I Peter decree” is the formula

in the Apostolic Constitutions, giving Paul first place. 99 A letter attributed to Anacletus states, “That is therefore the prima sedes

which belongs by celestial bounty to the Roman Church, which the most blessed Peter

and Paul consecrated by their

martyrium. ”100 Where does one find a rule that the place in which a hero dies is the

place in which most of his authority resides?

Not in Christian thinking, certainly. It is

rooted rather in the thinking of the pagan

world—where a hero dies, there is his shrine and the place of his spiritual survival.

It is the foundational theory of those

earthbound cults that are the essence of

Mediterranean religion. The cults of shrines and caves that abound in Pausanias dominate

the Near East at all times and flourish as

much as ever in the world of the Lady

Aetheria, who at the end of the fourth century visits the grottoes in which Christ was born, raised, preached, held the Last Supper and

was buried, resurrected, and ascended to

heaven. 101 The same letter of the dubious

Anacletus notes that Alexandria comes second “because Mark preached there under

Peter’s direction and there received his

glorious martyrdom. ”102 Antioch comes third because Peter there installed its bishop,

Ignatius, and the name “Christian” originated there. Note how carefully the letter avoids

making Peter himself bishop of either of the other two places, though there is every bit as much evidence that he was bishop in those

cities as that he was bishop at Rome.

Yet the same letter says that Rome

receives its principatum not from the apostles at all, but from the Lord himself. 103

Any church founded by an apostle could

make this claim with equal truth—for all the apostles were commissioned by the Lord.

No matter what the Lord said to Peter, the

question here is how and to whom Peter’s

authority was given, and in the absence of

any evidence at all, it is assumed that

because Peter died at Rome, more of his authority must reside there than elsewhere.

Yet the argument is spoiled by giving Peter

and Paul equal authority. If it can be proved that a church has a direct claim on the Lord’s promise to Peter, there is no need to bring

Paul’s office into the picture. Indeed it only confuses the issue where a single head and a monarchical authority is insisted upon. Peter, Paul, and Ignatius died at Rome for the same purpose, says Chrysostom, which was “to

extinguish idolatry with their blood,” not to establish a principle of authority. 104 Bringing Ignatius into the picture weakens the double apostolate just as the figure of Paul weakens the Petrine doctrine.

“Peter and Paul preached the gospel and

founded the church at Rome,” writes

Irenaeus, “and after they departed, Mark, the disciple and interpreter of Peter, himself

gave to us in writing the things taught by

Peter.” 105 If one remembers that Clement was supposed to have been chosen by Peter

to head the church solely because of his

experiences and intimacy with Peter and his

teachings, it is hard to see how Mark would

not have been the better candidate. It was

Mark who survived Peter as his closest

disciple and personal interpreter, not

Clement; it was Mark who as Peter’s scribe

should have written the letter to James if any was to be written. It was Mark who excelled

in the very qualities which are supposed to

have given Clement his position: yet

absolutely no mention of Mark is found

anywhere in the Clementine accounts.

Though Gustav Krüger expresses his

personal conviction that Peter was at Rome,

“since without that the history of the early church cannot be explained,” he says that it

“cannot be strictly proven by undoubted

evidence… . I cannot prove it, and neither

can anyone else.” 106 If Peter was there, he says “it was as we find him in Clement, as

one of those modest, unprepossessing, and

very impressive missionaries of the

Messiah.” 107 For “he left no early impressions at all,” 108 and “nearly everything in the traditions of Peter is

legend.” 109 Goguel also believed Peter was in Rome, but finds it strangely obvious that he did not play an important role there and

certainly did not found the church there, and, what is more, he had no influence in its

development. The tradition that makes him

the founder of the Roman Church and first

bishop of Rome comes from the middle of

the second century, according to Goguel,

having its rise “in a very vague statement in Clement of Rome.” 110

Clement to the Corinthians—Proof of

Roman Supremacy?

In the so-called letter of Clement to the Corinthians, “nearly all modern Catholic

historians see the first manifestation known to us of the special authority of the church of Rome in the universal church.” At the end of the first century, “Clement of Rome writes

already like a pope and intervenes with

imposing authority in the internal conflicts of the church.” 111 Does that make him a pope?

At the same time Ignatius was intervening

with far more “imposing authority” in the

internal affairs of half a dozen other

churches. There is not the slightest evidence that no other church but Rome intervened in

the affairs at Corinth, Jacques Zeiller

notes. 112 But what is more important is that Rome does not intervene at all—there is

nothing in the letter but the expression of a timid opinion, given, it is clearly explained, only because and only when the Corinthians

themselves asked for it (and the word

translated as “asked for” implies a general request made to various quarters for

information). There is no mention of the

name of Clement in the letter—if he wrote it, it was as a scribe; and he speaks only in the name of “the church temporarily staying at

Rome, to the church temporarily dwelling in

Corinth.” 113 So much for the church that was to “remain firm and steadfast until the end of the world.” 114 He gives no orders, though he states that the situation is desperate and

ruining the whole church; he never once

mentions his office, his authority, or his

name, though the situation desperately calls for a strong assertion of authority. He

appeals to the Corinthians only lamely “in

the name of blessed Sophia,” quoting very

cautiously a passage from the scriptures and leaving the Corinthians to draw their own

conclusions and do as they see fit. What

“imposing authority.”

Eusebius tells us that Dionysius, bishop of Corinth, later wrote a letter to the Romans in which he patronizingly compliments the

Romans on the Roman custom of helping the

needy and the mine workers by special

foundation. The letter business was

reciprocal. This letter, however is not

written to Soter, bishop of Rome, whom it

praises, but is specifically addressed to “the church of Rome,” which is always addressed

“you” in the plural. “Today is Sunday,” says the letter, “and we are reading the letter of yours—the first one, which was written

down by Clement. ”115 How rude of them to forget to mention that this Clement was a

bishop, let alone president of the church—

while all other bishops are receiving due

respect and recognition. What it does

mention is that it was he who actually wrote the letter—not dictating it, as a bishop

would. If Rome intervened in Corinth,

Bishop Polycarp of Smyrna intervened in Roman internal affairs with far more

authority, coming in person to the city,

allowing Irenaeus to boast that the doctrine of the Roman Church is apostolic—because

a man who had actually known an apostle

had taught there.

The Catholics see proof of Roman priority

in the fact that Ignatius, talking to seven

churches (far more frankly, incidentally, than Clement does to Corinth), does not rebuke

the Roman Church as he does the others. But

he was on his way to Rome and had actually

seen conditions in the other churches—he

had never yet been to Rome. When he

rebukes the other churches it is always on the basis of personal observation, and as yet he had made no personal observations in Rome.

On that head he naturally preserves silence.

Eusebius notes that Ignatius, “the second

successor of Peter in Antioch, wrote letters

to all the churches in which he had sojourned. ”116 Then he lists the cities receiving such letters and adds: “Besides

these he also wrote to the church of the

Romans.” 117 Here we see that Rome is indeed in a special category and immune to

firsthand criticism—the only kind that

Ignatius indulged in—because the saint had

not yet visited there and not because he

thought of it as particularly pure and holy.

A Dutch Benedictine, R. Van Cauwelaert,

has removed the last excuse for arguing that Rome’s intervention in the Corinthians’

trouble is an indication, let alone proof, of her position of leadership in the whole

church. For Rome had always had special

and intimate ties with Corinth that did not

extend to the rest of the church. Already Paul notes close ties between the two cities,

independent of the churches. American

excavations in Corinth have proven beyond a

doubt, says Van Cauwelaert, that there were indeed very special ties between the city of Rome and the city of Corinth. “Is it not

perfectly natural to assume that the relations between the two [Christian] communities

were of the same nature as those relations

which united the two cities?” 118 “The Christians of Rome and Corinth must have

conserved their previously established

social relationships, their civic spirit, their national sentiment, and even the pride in

their cities… . We may accept it as certain

that … the profane rapport [secular ties]

would furnish the desired foundation for

religious ties.” 119

Van Cauwelaert then reviews the history

of events by which, through a special

founding, Corinth became and remained a

uniquely Roman community in an island of

resentful Greeks. “The cult at Corinth was

actually more Roman than that of Rome itself

because it was less cosmopolitan.” 120 “In its official life,” our researcher concludes,

“whether political or religious, Corinth

appears before us in the first century [A.D.]

as a city entirely and exclusively Roman,

with an unequivocal note of puritanical

Romanism.” 121 The offices, customs, names, dress, manners, and tastes of the city were

all aggressively Roman; words on public

arts and private gadgets were all in Greek,

Latin, and Latin and Roman. Such a state

could have persisted, Van Cauwelaert notes,

“only through the persistent influence and

continual intervention of Rome itself, and an extreme docility, a veritable spirit of

submission on the part of Corinth.” 122 “Why then,” he asks, “should not the Christians,

conscious of forming a single body, remain

without such connections? Arguing apart

from the secular ties between Corinth and

Rome, we can admit that the Christians of the

two cities were not less united among themselves than their heathen fellow

citizens.” 123 If anything, they would be more so.

Clement himself refers to the hospitality of the Corinthians and speaks to them “in the

language not of a distant brother but of a

recognized member of the Christian family of Corinth.” 124 Socrates, giving a long list of men who have been bishops of more than

one city, notes especially the Rome-Corinth

connection. 125 In conclusion, Father Van Cauwelaert writes: “Consequently, the

question of whether 1 Clement is presented as an act of the Roman supremacy must

receive, it appears, a negative answer.

Evidently from the fact that the church of

Rome did not appeal to any special rights,

one would not be authorized to conclude that she was not conscious of some primacy.” 126

But 1 Clement cannot be taken as proof or

even evidence for it, and, says Van Cauwelaert, “we must underline the modest

style of the document as in perfect harmony

with the principles which it itself announces for those who wish to instruct others. ”127

“The more meek and humble a man is, the

greater he appears, and the proper thing is

ever to seek the common advancement—not

one’s own.” 128 Certainly the fact that Rome presumes to intervene in Corinthian affairs

was anything but an indication that Rome

was ruling the church.

Not only is the passage in 1 Clement

exhibit A in the claims of Roman supremacy

over the church, but it is also the only

evidence exhibited, and after that solitary

example, one must travel for over three

hundred years before coming upon another

such useful reference in the literature.

Heinrich Vogels’s collection of Ante-Nicene Texts Referring to the Primacy of Rome is

an extremely instructive lesson in the extent to which human ingenuity will go in trying to make ancient writers say what they have no

intention of saying.129 Not one of the passages Vogels produces even remotely

suggests a reference to the primacy of Rome.

The Leading Role the Roman Church

Did Not Play

The thundering silence of history regarding

the primacy of Rome is most significant only when we know just what role Rome was

supposed to have been playing all along. The present claim of the Roman Church is that the church is a perfect society and has an

independent organization. “The church has

… the right and office of preserving and of

expounding the revealed doctrine, and in that function is infallible. It preserves inviolate the deposit of the faith and explains its

infallibility, being never at any time in

error… . The pope is infallible even without the consensus of the church. A general

council acting in common with the pope

never errs” though national synods are

fallible. 130 “[The infant church],” writes Batiffol, “was a hierarchical society, a

church of churches, a unity preserved by the unity of the cathedra Petri, and she was conscious of being all that.” 131

One of many spurious letters attributed to

Anacletus, that very early pope whose name

is missing entirely from many of the lists,

says: “The apostles established the apostolic seat … so that the more important and

difficult questions could always be referred to the apostolic seat.” 132 Another very early pope, Evaristus, is quoted as writing to the Africans: “It is necessary to refer to the

apostolic seat, as to the head, whose charge it is to take charge in doubtful matters, and does not hold its office by usurpation. ”133

Evaristus is represented as writing a charge to the whole church: “If you have anything

against [your bishop], … refer all charges to the holy seat. ”134

Here we have a clear enough statement of

the things the head of the church should be

and do, functions for which there was a

crying need in the church from the time of the apostles until the Council of Trent, when the extent of the pope’s authority was still very much in question. They are functions that

remained unfulfilled for a thousand years in a church of chaos. Let us consider the

argument of silence in this connection.

If the primacy of Rome had been a fact, it

would have solved at a blow all the most

burning controversies of the first four

centuries. While everyone was casting about

desperately for a way out, an appeal to such primacy is suggested by no one. It did not,

Duchesne notes, occur to Athanasius.135

How gladly Constantine would have availed himself of it. It was with great reluctance that he himself took over the office of “bishop of bishops.” He was a Latin-speaking

Westerner, and if anyone knew of the Roman

claims, he should have. A nod from him was

enough to sustain the authority of any bishop without limitation and without opposition, as was proven again and again. He was eagerly

seeking some principle of authority, some

theory of general rule for the church, and any theory became an enthusiastic practice at

Constantine’s word. Yet it is never hinted for a moment that in the primacy of Peter he has the obvious solution to his problem.

“Christianity was born catholic,” writes

the ecstatic Batiffol, referring to its unified, universal, centralized organization, 136 and he is right. But why did it not remain so? “With the passing of the earliest age, all this

itinerant, ubiquitous personnel disappeared,

and nothing remained but local ecclesiastical organizations. ”137 Could they be trusted to follow the right path independently? Their

courses promptly diverged in all directions, so that the historian Socrates can report that in his day no two churches had the same rites or doctrines138—a central control was badly needed, but it simply was not there.

“It was to the great Babylon of the West,

so cursed by the Jewish prophets, that the

role of leadership fell,” says Duchesne.139

Why then does it not lead? It is very strange that in spite of this hierarchical preeminence, Rome was organized exactly like the church

in any other city with no more and no less

official machinery than was necessary to

carry on the business of the local city church.

Were these offices adequate to supply the

central leadership which the church so badly needed? Just as a bishop and an apostle

cannot, by the nature of their callings, fill

each other’s offices, so the episcopal organization of Rome was neither designed

to be the government of the church nor equal to it. Duchesne argues elsewhere that the

proof that certain offices must have existed in the primitive church lies in the fact that certain functions were carried out: without

the office the function would have been

impossible and inconceivable. 140 And so when we find that “no one dreams” at Rome

of establishing that personnel indispensable to the functions of church government, it can only be because those functions were

lacking. We can trace the periodic

introduction of offices and functionaries to fill a crying need, but those offices were not original to the Roman system.

Though Paul is thought to be the real

founder of world Christianity, Karl Holl can only marvel at Paul’s unconcern for

problems of organization:141 it was the

elders at Jerusalem who worked all that out.

Paul, as we have seen, did not think of

himself as establishing either a large or a

permanent institution. If we are to believe

the Roman claims, both Peter and Paul each

spent at the very least twenty-five years in Rome, engaged in the work of organizing the

church. Now, Clement really was something

of an organizer, and we have volumes of

stories about his activities, albeit legendary.

But neither Peter nor Paul has left behind that corpus of stories, legends, and true accounts which each of these dynamic men most

assuredly must have if the Roman claim is

valid. We have noted Ignatius’s complete

silence on the apostolicity of the episcopal office, though his purpose in writing was to build up the prestige of that office; we have noted his distress at the condition in which he finds the church, how he takes it upon

himself to write disciplinary letters “because

his love will not be silent,” 142 though no one has ordered him to do so. He knows of no

general authority to whom he can appeal for

orders to the churches; he himself has

received no authorization from such. Ignatius refuses to name the troublemakers, exactly as Clement will not name them at Corinth. Why

not? Paul is quite specific in naming the

ringleaders in that same church. Why doesn’t Clement follow his example?

As we have seen, in the days of the

apostolic fathers everyone was writing

letters to everyone else. These letters were sent directly, copied, and spread among the

churches to provide general edification and

instruction. Thus on the death of Polycarp,

the church of Smyrna sends out an epistle “to the church of God in Philomelium and to all

the churches throughout the entire world. ”143

There are numbers of well-attested instances of this sort of thing (e.g., Ignatius to

Polycarp, Papias, Barnabas, later Irenaeus to Rome, etc.), but there is no central

clearinghouse in action. Remembering that

these letters are official and addressed to the whole church and that the writers justify

themselves by feelings of love and urgency

while admitting that they are not authorized to give orders to other churches—one must

accept this as evidence that there is no

central authority in the church. When a

serious question arose, to whom should it be referred? We have quoted the claim of

Anacletus that it was the very purpose of the Roman See to handle just such cases144—that is logical and sound, and it shows us thereby that a head of the church did not exist, for in that case all these questions of doctrine and authority would have been referred to it;

bishops would not have attempted to correct

widespread troubles in other churches by

direct letter but would have referred matters

of rioting and insubordination to the head, and from that head we would have a stream

of letters and directives, to be copied and

quoted everywhere. This is recognized by

the Romans themselves in their numerous

attempts to forge such letters. But there is neither direct nor indirect evidence that the churches were being governed from Italy,

and there is a good deal of evidence that they were not.

Irenaeus says that after the persecutions in which Peter and Paul lost their lives, John

returned from Patmos “and continued to

govern the churches,” as he had authority to do. 145 With the Easter controversy, a rush of epistle writing and exchange of visits broke out again, as the only means of reaching

general agreement. Irenaeus, bishop of

Lyons, says that he has written “various

letters” refuting a false conception of Easter that has become popular at Rome. “The

elders before us, and those who lived with the apostles never handed down such

teachings to you,” he says, rebuking Victor, bishop of Rome. 146 Who ordered Irenaeus to write letters of instruction to Rome, let alone to administer a rebuke? He tells us who. He

says it was his own idea because he felt the church needed a defender and it should be

he. “Let a bishop be judged by a bishop, a

layman by a layman, and a prince by a

prince,” says the Apostolic Constitutions.147

And he continues: “The sheep are

[answerable as] rational beings [for their

own behavior]. Hence they should flee from

pernicious pastors. ”148 But where is the head? “A bishop be judged by a bishop”—

not the later rule that the bishop of bishops judges a bishop. 149

Again, the well-known rule is that a

bishop must be ordained by at least three or, at the very least, by two other bishops. What

about his being ordained by the pope? Is not Peter supposed to have single-handedly

ordained his successor? In all the epistles of the earliest “popes,” none refers to himself as anything but “Archbishop of the Roman

Church.” 150 Sixtus I, according to our Catholic editor, is the first one to use the title universalis apostolicae Ecclesiae

episcopus. 151 But if ever there was a well-defined title, it is that of archbishop, a term so specialized that its use here is the

equivalent of calling the king of England lord mayor of London—an honorable title,

indeed, but one that excludes him from the

throne by implication. If the bishop of Rome were really the president of the church from the beginning and were recognized as such,

he would have had a special and fitting

designation and would not always be

referred to, as he is, merely as bishop or

archbishop. This again is recognized by

those Catholic divines who faithfully, but inaccurately, translate the word episcopus as

“pope” when the bishop in question happens

to be bishop of Rome, but simply as

“bishop” when he is any other episcopus.

One learned Romanist in his enthusiasm even

translates episcopus as “pontiff” whenever it applies to the bishop of Rome even when

mentioned by Eusebius—though Eusebius

died years before anybody but the Roman

emperor was allowed to bear the august title of pontiff. On the other hand, with admirable consistency and determination, the same

scholars—when they find African bishops

such as Cyprian or the bishop of Alexandria

called “pope” long before the title is applied to anybody at Rome—mechanically translate

the word as “bishop.” So episcopus is to be read “pope” when it applies to the bishop of Rome, and “pope” is to be read episcopus, or “bishop,” whenever it applies to anybody

else. By such methods it is possible to make out in translation a pretty good case for

Rome—but only by such methods.

Who shall judge a bishop when he does

wrong? asks the Apostolic Constitutions.

Naturally, the bishop’s superior. But the

Apostolic Constitutions knows of no such superior. The bishop must judge himself;

there is no higher authority. He must follow the admonition of the Delphic oracle: “Know

thyself.” 152 It is indeed a sore absence of authority that leads Christian bishops to seek their ultimate appeal for authority in the

judgment of holy Apollo.

In the Contendings of the Apostles we read: “And when I Clement met my master

Peter, he appointed me to be the Archbishop

of the city of Rome, and he made me chief of the congregation; and he appointed Euodius

… to be the Archbishop of the city of

Antioch; and Paul appointed Mark, the son of

Aresto to be Archbishop of the city of Alexandria,” etc. 153

“God has long ago removed all external

danger from the church,” writes Origen. “But I do not believe this security … in this life can last long. Already the troublemakers are stirring up stasis inside the multitude of the believers, and they are not being opposed by the leaders, as they were in ancient

times.” 154 This is the very situation described by Hegesippus with the passing of

the last apostle: “As soon as the apostles and those who knew them firsthand had all

passed, those who had been lurking in dark

corners came out openly, threw off the

disguise, and began to preach their false

doctrines with utter impunity, there being no more apostles around to put them in their

place.” 155 They sprang up, says Irenaeus, in the absence of apostolic authority. Had the

apostles actually chosen and fully authorized

successors and had the nature and location of that authority been clearly declared to all the church, the passing of the apostles would of course only have been an episode and not the complete disaster it was. Those who had

been intimidated by the presence of genuine

apostles and elders would have continued to

stand in awe of their genuine successors. But such was not the case.

Celsus sneers at the way the Christians, a

united body in the early days, had finally

broken up into innumerable wrangling sects

—and Origen must admit the charge,

justifying that state of things by a feeble

comparison with the wholesomeness of

differing opinions among philosophers and

scientists. But his answer is beside the point: philosophers and medics may quarrel no end

about their theories, but the revealed word of God should not be the subject of bickering,

and we have seen that the Romans claim the

Holy See was established from the very beginning to preserve unity and perfect

agreement. Why doesn’t Origen, the most

learned Christian of his time, know about

that? Clement of Alexandria observes with

sorrow that there are people everywhere

who say they cannot join the Christian church because it is a hotbed of warring sects. His answer is the same as Origen’s: the Greeks

and Jews are just as bad! Forced himself to

choose among the sects, Clement bases his

choice wholly on the argument of numbers:

the biggest sect must be the true one, an

argument on which Athanasius pours

withering scorn. 156 The largest consensus-group must be the true preservers of the

tradition, and the others must be the strays, Clement concludes. What an argument for

divine authority! But what we wish to note

here is that the existence of a clearly

recognized head in the church somewhere

would have immediately solved Clement’s problem: the only possible norm would be to

follow the teachings of the established head, no matter which sect was biggest, if only

such a head existed. But Clement knew of

none.

That the fourth-century idea of mother

church comes from the idea of mother city is clear from the earlier Corinthian concept of a spiritual mother. When the Judge Hierax,

an early Christian martyr, was asked who his parents were, he replied: “Our father is

Christ, and our mother our belief in him. ”157

And Eusebius tells how under Constantine

all the human race was in a holy family

“having one father, God, and one mother, true piety. ”158 The religious role of Constantine and the instantaneous and ecstatic acclaim he received from the churchmen would have

been out of the question had the church

possessed a single leader anywhere—even

as a faintly remembered tradition. But for three hundred years there had been no

general conference, simply, we are told,

because there had been no one with the

authority to call such a conference until the appearance of Constantine. “He was

common with all men; when the various

provinces of the church differed among

themselves, he, as a common bishop

established by God, would summon synods

of God’s ministers. And he would sit in their midst, not ashamed to be one of their number, becoming the common bishop, acting as

umpire for all in matters of God’s peace.” 159

This is the office that Rome should have

been performing, yet there was no protest

from Rome, whose aged bishop sent

ambassadors, and we are told in no uncertain terms that since the days of the apostles no one else had done anything like what

Constantine was doing. Yet Constantine did

what he did reluctantly; he begged the bishops to settle their affairs among

themselves. “Since you will fight about

trifles,” he wrote to all the bishops, “I have been forced to write this letter, finding it necessary to come forward as a guardian of

the peace. I am forced to set myself up as a moderator among you.” 160 As a peace officer, it is his duty to intervene and bring peace into the church, and to do that he uses the civil techniques: “Being desirous of

bringing this plague to a halt, I could find no other means of cure or of casting out the

common evil, than to send abroad my

messengers.” 161

At the council, Julius is described as

“Leader of the Ruling City”—that is, the

most important thing that can be said about

him is that his city is imperial.162 Had it been the case, this would have been the time to

say that he was the ruling bishop, the head of

the church, the one and only successor to the apostles, etc., and not just bishop of what

everybody knew was the imperial city. The

priests he sent took orders from him, but no one else did. Since the primary question at

Nicaea concerned who was to rule the

church—the doctrinal issue, as has been said above, was merely a tool of power groups—

now of all times was the time for Rome to

assert her claim, this being the first and

holiest of all the general synods. But instead,

“since the beginning of the world only one

man, the Emperor Constantine, having woven

a crown of peace in the bond of Christ,

offered to his Savior a godly thanksgiving

offering for victory over his public and

private enemies, having brought to pass as it were a likeness of the assembly of the

ancient apostles in our own time. ”163 A miracle and a wonder—the first general

assembly since the days of the apostles—and

only one man was able to bring it about!

Calling it a miracle is no exaggeration.

Bishops came from all over the world to the

meeting wearing strange dresses, speaking

strange languages, teaching strange

doctrines, practicing strange rites. Socrates says no two churches had the same liturgy,

viewing each other as strangers from other

planets164—what better demonstration of the effect of centuries of isolation during which no single center gave them instruction or

ever brought them together? Constantine’s

opponent, the Christian Licinius, was for the churchmen “a wild beast,” and the worst

thing he ever did, according to them, was to forbid the holding of synods, “the only way

in which the church could be governed.” 165

When just after the Nicene Council Julius

of Rome wrote a triumphant letter to

Alexandria on behalf of Athanasius,

glorifying the successes of the West, he made

no mention of the primacy of Rome.166 At the same time we find Hilary of Poitiers writing in his own name letters to his “brothers and cobishops in Germany, Belgium, Lyons,

Aquitaine, Narbonne, Tolosay and Britain,”

that is, the whole Western church except

Italy, giving doctrinal instructions and an

official report on events in the East.167

“Though you are firm in the faith,” he writes,

“still there are some of you who have

forwarded to me letters asking for

communications from me: I will therefore,

inexperienced and untaught as I am,

undertake the heavy task of clarifying

things.” 168 How dare he! Was not the apostolic seat established for that very

purpose? Hilary protests that he is reluctant and poorly qualified—why then does he not

“forward” to the head of the church the

difficult doctrinal questions that have been

“forwarded” to him, not from this or that

small suffragan church of his own French diocese, but from all over Europe? This is

double outrage! Are not both these functions

—(1) the official reporting of acts and

decisions and (2) the judgment of their

orthodoxy—the exclusive and proper

business of Rome? The Romanists later

claim so, but Hilary knows of no such claim.

The terrible rioting, charges, and

countercharges that resulted from parties

competing for the office of bishop in the

church in the days of the apostolic fathers

continued unabated. We have read vivid

descriptions of all these riots: “some are

actually filling the churches with murder,

leading whole cities to riot and revolt, all because they are fighting [to be elected

bishops]. ”169 If Clement, viewing this very situation three hundred years before,

intervened “with opposing authority,” as the Catholics say, to put an end to it, why did it

continue to grow constantly worse? Why did not somebody now intervene? Somebody did

—and it was always the emperor. But the

point is that a central authority in the church would have quickly worked out a way of

dealing with these local uprisings if that

central authority had only existed. Later on, when there was such a central authority in

Rome, the rioting at episcopal elections, the commonest cause of unrest in the church,

ceased.

The apostles knew, writes Clement, that

there would be trouble about this office of

bishop, and so they made an epinome (i.e., a bylaw or special order) to take care of it.170

The apostles also knew, writes Socrates, that there would be trouble about doctrine, so

they also wrote down an official statement of doctrine—“but this letter was held as a thing of naught,” and so the problem was not

solved. 171 In these cases we are told how the

apostles “transmitted their authority,” and it is not through the person of a chosen

successor. From the first, the sorest spot in the church, the episcopal election, was to

have come under special surveillance: yet

nothing is more evident than that after the

passing of the apostles there is no such

general surveillance over the elections. “I

charge you by the fathers,” writes Basil to

the people of Neocaesarea, whose bishop

has died, “and by the true faith, [each man

must seek to do good in electing a new

bishop].” 172 “Inasmuch as the infirmity of the churches is becoming greater,” writes Basil

to Athanasius, the bishop of Alexandria,

“more and more we must look to thy

perfection … to deliver us from this terrible tempest [wintertime].” 173 When a church elected a new bishop without consulting

Basil, he could only wring his hands in

protest and cry, “There is no stability in this

sort of thing! ”174 How true. Does he not know where there is stability? Is the man to whom all must turn in the general shipwreck

of the church Athanasius and no other?

Where is the imposing authority of Rome?

Cyril, Basil’s contemporary, always calls

the church leaderless. He argues that Manes

cannot be the Paraclete [Holy Spirit], as his followers claim he is, because he came two

hundred years after the death of the apostles, while the Paraclete came only in the time of the apostles. 175 Where has it been in the meantime? “There are three periods in the

history of the church,” writes Cyril, “that of Christ, that of the apostles and”—we wait in eager anticipation for the successor in the

leadership, but in vain—“those times which

have passed since the apostles.” 176 What a strange way to designate the third period of the church. It is as disappointing as

Clement’s announcement that Christ gave the

gnosis to Peter, James, and John; they

“passed it on” to the rest of the Twelve; and they in turn “passed it on to the Seventy.” 177

Since the discussion is of the transmission of the key—the knowledge of the gospel—we

wait for the next link in the chain, but there is none.

Even so the apostolic fathers assure us that God the Father gave his authority to the Son and that Christ gave the same authority to the apostles, but they refuse to say that that

authority was passed on to bishops. 178

Instead we are told that in the places where they preached, the apostles chose firstfruits in the faith and made provision that when

these fell asleep, others not unworthy should succeed them. 179 Here is definite mention of succession, but pointedly not of succession

from the apostles to the bishops. The fathers scrupulously avoid defining the succession,

which they must if the Roman claim is true.

“When you are visiting a strange city,” Cyril advises his Alexandrian congregation,

“never ask simply, ‘Where is the church?’ for every vile sect calls its meeting place by the good name of the Lord; neither ask simply,

‘Where is the ekklesia?’ but say rather,

‘Where is the catholic church?’ for this name happens to be holy even as the mother of all of us. ”180 This still preserves the old original sense of “catholic,” namely, the

general society as opposed to the individual communities. Thus we have very early

letters addressed to individual churches by

name and still others addressed to “the

general church.” That is the meaning of the

word catholic—it does not mean universal.

But its very early use in letters shows it to go back to a time when there were actually

general authorities. The secondary meaning

is given it by Cyril: “It is called the catholic church because it is found throughout all the

inhabited world, because it is the complete preaching of every wholesome doctrine,

because the whole human race is disciplined

for piety, because it is a whole cure for

every appearance of sin, and because it

contains every concept of what is called

virtue.” 181 This is an obvious rhetorical etymologizing, but note how completely

silent Cyril is on the subject of a single head.

“Your father said,” writes Ambrose to

Constantius, “ ‘it is not my business to judge between bishops,’ but you say, ‘I must do the judging.’ ”182 What Constantine did say was that it is nobody’s business to judge between bishops. As a matter of fact, Ambrose has

taken that function upon himself, so that

people say, he notes, “that Ambrose wants to have more authority than the emperor.” 183

But where does this discussion leave Rome?

Who is to judge between bishops? On that

head, Rome and Ambrose played a rough

game against each other.

Why does even the devoted Optatus, a

Roman by birth and living not far off, use

such restrained language when he writes:

“[The line of popes ends with] Siricius, who today is our associate, along with whom all

the rest of us they make a common society of all the world, in the concord of a single

society. ”184 No mention is made of subordination but only of agreement. “Should people be baptized again in the name of

Trinity?” 185 he asks. Since no one is

“qualified to judge these things on earth, no judge is to be found, and so we must look to the judge in heaven.” 186 But why ask heaven when we already have heaven’s answer?

Why indeed? Because it was the

interpretation of the New Testament that they were fighting about in the first place. What a gross insult to Rome, if Rome had anything

like the authority she is now assumed to have

had! Optatus continues: But why is even the New Testament necessary? “As long as the

Father is present, … testament [i.e., a

witness of him in his absence] is not

necessary. Christ told the apostles all that was necessary. The one of whom the

Testament bears witness is actually alive in heaven: therefore his will is to be required in the gospels as if in a will.” The answer to rebaptize is therefore Matthew 28:29, plus

John 13:10.187 In the end Optatus falls back, as do all sectarians, on the scriptures, but he comes very near the answer when he points

out that God is still alive and falls into the inevitable conclusion: why not ask him, then, directly? In the nick of time he catches

himself by falling back again on the

scriptures, the very subject of dispute! But throughout the whole discourse this loyal

Italian preserves a total and very significant silence regarding the proper function of the

Holy See—a few miles away.

A few years later in 416, a bishop of

Rome writes to the bishop of Gubbio, within

his own metropolitan district, deploring the fact that the ritual and liturgy of that church is not and never has been that practiced at

Rome. 188 Where is the Roman control?

Rome is supposed to be guiding the church,

and the soul of the church is the mass. Yet in the ninth century, liturgy had entirely died out at Rome, and it was necessary for the

Frankish church, aided by the reform of the

Cluniac monks, to save it for Rome and the

world! “[These],” says Gerhart Ladner,

“compelled the papacy by main force to

return to the path of leadership of the general church.” 189

Is there one who has not merely

transmitted the teaching of the church to

others, but has taught the church itself, and whose doctrine has consequently been

generally followed and authorized by the church? But would this not be a usurpation of the authority of the apostolic see? The

earliest instance of such teaching would

seem to be that of Hermas. “In those days,”

says a letter attributed to Pius I, “Hermas, doctor of the faith and scripture, scintillated among us. An angel of the Lord appeared to

the same Hermas dressed as a shepherd and

told him that Easter should be on Sunday.

Hence we are able to teach this by apostolic authority. ”190 This must have been written long after Hermas, for the writer does not

even know that it is just an allegory. But it is very significant that Pius I rests his authority in this decision not on Peter, but rather on the claim of a man who was not a bishop that an

angel had appeared to him. Therefore, he

says amazingly, we know that his doctrine is apostolic. For the same doctrine of Easter as taught in Rome, Irenaeus gives a wholly

different authority191—he had never heard of the angel, a later invention. He says the

Roman version is apostolic because

Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna, actually went to Rome in person and put the bishop of Rome

on the right track—and Polycarp, he reminds

us, has actually known John. 192 He gives this as the best proof he knows that Rome teaches apostolic doctrine. But how insulting to the Petrine claims! Polycarp and Hermas should

be taking instruction from the head of the

church—not giving it.

The introduction to Origen’s great Peri

Archón is a most significant document. 193

Next to Augustine, Origen was most

important. In the establishing of Christian

theology, he kept seven secretaries busy

night and day answering the questions of

doctrine and authority that poured in to him from all parts of the church. In the First Principles he announces his intention to deal

not with trivial and technical details of doctrine, but with the great first principles on which the whole thing is founded.

Christians disagree, he announces at the

outset, not only on minor but on major

matters, on the very fundamentals. 194 They agree, for example, that the Holy Ghost

comes next in honor to God and Jesus Christ,

“but it is not stated clearly whether the Holy Ghost was begotten or not—that we must

find out from the scripture to the best of our ability by a sagacious inquisition.” 195 It is agreed that “the devil and his angels exist, but why or how or what they are has not

been clearly enough set forth.” 196 It is agreed

“that the world was created … but what

comes before or after … is not evident in the teachings of the church”; 197 we know that there are angels, but what, how, and when

they are “is not sufficiently manifest” ;198 the word that best describes God is asomaton—

bodiless—yet that word is unused and unknown in the scriptures. 199 And so on.

Origen announces that he must to the best of his ability seek a solution to such problems in philosophy because the church has not

given an answer to them and he knows not to

whom he can turn for information.

Have we not been told that the very

purpose of the Holy See was to answer such

questions and that it alone has the authority to do so? Everyone has his own ideas; all

claim to be followers of Christ, Origen

announces, and yet they disagree about

everything. He says he will follow “the

ecclesiastical preaching through order of

succession handed down from the apostles

and remaining until the present in the

churches,” 200 but he knows of no authoritative head to which he can turn and

says that basic doctrines “are not manifestly set forth in our preaching.” 201 Something had

to be done about it—but was it his calling, who was not even a bishop, to become the

great authority? How can heretic groups be

distinguished from the followers of the true apostolic teaching, which all of them pretend to be following? Aside from the lame

argument of number, Clement of Alexandria

introduces another test: “They can be

distinguished by interpreting the law of clean and unclean animals in a mystical sense. ”202

But “a mystical sense” covers anything, and

Clement is perfectly aware that one group is just as able to turn the scriptures against its enemies as another. Yet he knows of nothing

better than this—no general doctrinal head to appeal to. “It is foolish,” he says, “to turn down Christianity because it is divided into many sects. We must by demonstration and

hard study show from the scriptures that only in the true and ancient church are the most

holy gnosis and the best choice of things.

There are many who appear wise and who really believe they have found the truth and who are followed by large congregations …

but as a matter of fact they only obscure the truth by their clever manipulations.” 203 Here Clement recommends his brand of

Christianity as the best heresy—that is, the best choice among many. Where are the pure

teachings and imposing authority of Rome?

At the end of every major discussion, Origen can only invite “the reader to decide for

himself. ”204 Yet Clement and Origen were the greatest theologians of their times.

The situation in the fourth century is neatly stated by Lactantius: “Only the catholic

church, therefore, retains the true cult [the word retains is significant, suggesting that the others once had it but lost it, thus

admitting the awareness as well as the

possibility of loss]. But since, however,” he continues, “separate groups of heretics insist

that they are the true Christians and firmly believe that they are the catholic church, we must identify the true church as the one

which salubriously cures sins and wounds.

To do this we must fight more wholly and

devotedly against all the sects of liars. ”205

Still nobody thinks of the See of Peter!

Nobody thought of it when upon the death of

the last apostle, the heretics, seeing that there were no longer any apostles, were free to

cast off their long disguises.

There was a Bishop Nepos in Egypt,

greatly admired for his noble character and

his great gift for hymn writing, who tried to revive the old doctrine of the millennium,

using Revelation as a text. One of his

warmest admirers, Bishop Dionysius of

Alexandria, protested against this dangerous literalism but observed, “If Christ and the

apostles were still here we could ask them

about such things. As it is, we had best

content ourselves with a ‘spiritual’

interpretation of the scriptures. ”206 Here we see that the scriptures are at best a poor

substitute for direct revelation. But again we ask the question, If Christ and the apostles could tell about such things, then why not

their successors? Bishop Dionysius was not

impressed by the authority, in doctrinal

matters, of himself or any other man upon the earth, including the bishop of Rome.

“When can we convince ignorant and

uneducated people that among all the

heresies, the Catholic Church has the correct faith and does not make mistakes?” asks

Athanasius, aware that scriptural

demonstrations, especially of the “spiritual”

sort recommended by Bishop Dionysius, are

not too convincing for the masses. 207 Now would be the time for Athanasius, one of the very greatest heroes of the Roman clergy, to come out with “thou art Peter.” But he does

nothing of the sort. Instead, he gives an astonishingly weak form of orthodoxy: The

best way to convince the people of the

preeminence of the Catholic Church is

through teaching them about the holy places, where Christ did this or that. The holders of the holy places must be the true sect, says

Athanasius, since God would not allow

those places to fall into the hands of

heretics. 208 What a last-resort argument!

Another writing attributed to Athanasius

opposes those who teach that things they are told should be believed outright on authority, without checking whether they are proper or

improper. 209 But where is authority when he can talk like that?

In writing his famous report on the synods

to the Western bishops in the middle of the

fourth century, Hilary, bishop of Poitiers,

justifies the liberty he takes by the great

demands that have been made of him and by

his inability in a crisis to keep silence: “I think it is [a] necessary and religious act for me to forward these colloquia to you as a

bishop to bishops.” 210 Great numbers of letters have been written to him by bishops

asking for his report, and though he is “very unexpert and untaught,” he acts boldly on his own authority to answer them. 211 Hilary uses a neat rhetorical device for discovering

which of the more than seventy-two warring

sects is the true one: They all fight against each other, he says, accusing each other of

being heretics and thus mutually canceling

each other out. But in one thing they agree—

they all make war together against our

church, and, since their mutual disagreements show them to be false, the common object of

their opposition must be the true church. The problem with this argument, as a little

reflection will show, is that it can be applied with equal validity by any sect. For if the

churches are all fighting each other, then any one of them can say with perfect truth that all the others have the one thing in common—

namely, that they are fighting it and that

therefore it stands alone against them all and can be the only pure and undefiled one of the lot. 212

Yielding to the urging that comes from

bishops all over Europe, Hilary discloses

that he has frequently sent them important

doctrines, reports, and interpretations,

without dreaming of consulting Rome.

Fearing lest I be guilty, among such and

so many bishops, of disastrous impiety or in peril of error: For as I have frequently

signified to you in most of the cities of the Roman provinces what is being considered

by our religious brethren the bishops of the East … fearing lest either amidst the

disastrous impiety of the larger number of

bishops, or in the danger of error, assuming that your own silence came from the despair

born of the awareness of pollution and impiety, I decided that I too should preserve silence before you (for I cannot deny that

you have often been admonished to

silence). 213

He thinks it necessarium and religiosum to transmit the latest information to the bishops of the West, “as a bishop to a bishop.” This is surely a most remarkable situation. This

man is the main intermediary between the

vast empires of the church in the East and

West: all write to him directly for

communication, and whether he

communicates or not, what he says and how

he says it is entirely his own decision.

Whatever control there is of this vital

intercourse lies entirely with Hilary, the

bishop of Poitiers—not the bishop of Rome,

who is not consulted one way or the other. In exactly the same spirit, in 375 some Cyprian monks wrote to Epiphanius, who was then a

bishop in Cyprus, begging him to write against all the heresies. “Since not only

these, but a great many others were

appealing to him, as it were, forcing him to comply,” 214 Epiphanus was willing to make use of learned men’s services and would

commission them to write. If there were a

head of the church somewhere, he would

have entreated him. That is the way it would be done if there were a head of the church,

but that is never the way it was done.

Hilary is in exactly the same position as

the apostolic fathers and their successors—

all of whom taught because they could not

restrain themselves and not by any special

commission. But who gives such a

commission? “The aging Bishop Augustine,”

wrote Hans von Campenhausen, “became for

the Latin world the authority—all churches

and theologians of the West turn to him for

information and advice. The question of

freedom and grace was his special interest, but he died before he solved it.” 215 Had Augustine been commissioned by God rather

than chosen by men to solve the deep and

distressing doctrinal questions of the church, he could not possibly have died before he

solved the four gravest and most burning

questions. In fact, he would not have

“solved” them at all—that, says Justin, is the method of philosophers, but the church’s

questions are solved by prophets, who

operate in an entirely different manner. 216

Again we return to the claims of the

Roman Church—that one see alone was

established for the specific purpose that men might appeal to it with “the more important

and difficult problems of doctrine.” 217 Why didn’t people turn to Rome then? Why didn’t

Augustine himself? Why did he not refer his

questioners to Rome? On occasion he did

send them on a pilgrimage to the tomb of St.

Felix near Milan. 218 He knew all about Rome—it was his old stamping grounds, but

in his mighty wrestling with the great

problems of theology to which his personal

solutions were to remain the authoritative

ones for all time, it never occurred to him

that there he might find his answer. When

during many years he sought desperately for

someone—anyone—who would give him an

authoritative and convincing exposition of

Christian doctrine, he never thought of going to what is now put forth as the fountainhead, as he certainly would have done had that

fountainhead existed in his day. It also did not occur to Augustine’s great contemporary, Jerome, who knew of no ultimate authority

on the question of doctrines: “I know that the most learned men have disputed this question from various sides, and each one has

declared what he has thought correct

according to his lights and understanding.

Since therefore it is a dangerous thing to judge among the opinions of the teachers of

the church, and to prefer one to another, I

will report what each one says and leave it

to the judgment of the reader which opinion

should be followed.” 219 Another double insult to Rome, and this time by the author of the Vulgate: (1) In all the church there is no authority whose opinion is to be preferred to another’s, and so (2) the individual reader is free to decide for himself.

Socrates tells how “the apostles had many

differences of doctrine to deal with in their own times, and since they knew these would

be the cause of great disturbances among the gentiles, they all came together and

formulated the holy law… . But the teachings of this letter were distorted and the

injunctions of the apostles held as a thing of naught.” 220 As a result, he says, there are hardly two churches in the world today who

have the same rites, observances, and doctrine. Here he claims that the apostles

confided all their doctrinal instructions and authority not to a personal successor, but to a letter, and that when the letter failed to work, the result was chaos. This completely rules

out any awareness on the part of Socrates, a major historian, that the apostles left any

special successor to control such matters. In preserving doctrine, the church tries to

follow Paul’s directions, but by 585 Pope

Pelagius II can write: “And though many

instructions are taught by the authority of

subtlety, still the defect of our times, in

which not only the merits but the very bodies of men are failing, does not allow censure of this limitation in all things.” 221

Establishing a Connection with Peter

—A Return to Matthew 16:18

In the Vatican excavations of recent years,

the announced intent of discovering definite ties with Peter has something of a last-ditch determination about it. This air of finality is matched by the distressing finality of the

results. “It appears,” writes Paul Lemerle,

summing up the evidence, “that there is no

chance of possessing a tomb or any

authentiques reliques of Peter. The Vatican excavations … might well have established

whether there was a tomb and relics,

authentic or not.” 222

The world is never allowed to forget that

the foundation and stay of the whole Roman

position is that verse of scripture that adorns the highest circle of the interior of the dome of St. Peter’s in a convenient mistranslation and in letters of heroic size. In the nineteenth century, the Protestant attacks on Matthew

16:18 were all aimed at showing that those

words were very probably never spoken by

Christ. The most powerful argument in favor

of that theory is Adolf von Harnack’s observation that until the middle of the third century no one ever quotes that all-important verse. Yet it is precisely because Christ did speak those words that the silence of the

early centuries is so thunderous. The fact that no one thinks to cite Matthew 16:18 through

three long centuries of ferocious controversy on the subject of authority does not prove

that those words were not available to the

early fathers, but it does most emphatically prove that those fathers did not see in those words the organic franchise of an

established church. That high and holy

matters are under discussion in this

important conversation, of which we have

only a few broken fragments in Matthew 16,

is apparent to all; that the three gospels have no intention of revealing to the world what

these matters were should be equally

apparent—if only from the strict injunction

to silence placed upon the apostles at the time.

From the Christian point of view,

Protestant as well as Catholic, the important passage is not “thou art Peter,” but “the gates of hell shall not prevail.” For while no one has been able to establish historical

connection with Peter, the statement about

the gates of hell seems a general and

unequivocal promise that the church will go

forth invulnerable, from which we cannot

avoid the conclusion that the church is not

only to continue “firm and steadfast until the end of the world,” 223 but that it actually has in the end nothing to fear. “The gates of hell”

is quoted as often and as fervidly by Baptists as by the Catholics themselves, and that to

prove that their church, marked by its “trail of blood,” must have persisted through the

ages from the time of Christ. But does the

magnificent assurance of the “gates of hell”

hint at anything as poor as an intermittent trail of blood? Just what is meant by the

peculiar expression, “the gates of hell shall not prevail against it”? That is the all-important question for both Catholics and

Protestants—a question which they never

examine.

Once the meaning of the phrase “gates of

hell” is clear, it is equally clear why no one in the first centuries of the church ever

referred to that verse to prove that the church would survive or to show where its head

would be. It has nothing to do with the future of the church on earth but refers to a high and secret matter about which the second century of the church knew nothing. That explains

why it is never referred to at all. It is one of those “teachings of the elders,” which,

Irenaeus informs us, his generation regarded as “rather mysterious” and could not hope to explain. “In the second century,” Harnack

discovers, “not a single church father or heretic made any reference to this verse

(Matthew 16:18), even in those cases in

which one would, in view of its context,

expect such a reference. Tertullian and the

author of the Clementine homilies are the

first to attest it.” 224 In this case the Clementine author does not use the word

petra at all, but instead writes

foundations. 225 But what, in this earliest reference, could the foundation of the church have been; what was meant by “the rock”?

Two of the most distinguished theologians of the fourth century, Hilary and Basil, both say the rock was revelation—the others do not

mention it.

Erasmus’s marginal note in Hilary’s

comment on Matthew 16:18, Ecclesiae

fundamentum fides, is fully borne out by Hilary’s own text: “The Son of God the

Heavenly Father refers to revelation. O

happy foundation for the announcement of the new name of the church!” 226 Elsewhere Hilary writes: “Peter confesses that Christ is the Son of God. This faith is the foundation of the church: through this faith the gates of the lower regions are made weak against her.

This faith holds the keys of the kingdom of

heaven. This faith will bind in heaven and

earth. This faith is the guarantee of

revelation from the Father… . This is the

revelation of the Father; this is the eternal security.” 227 Not a word about any geographical conditioning of a grant of

power, no dwelling on the name of Peter. “It is this [confession of Peter],” writes Basil,

“which is the true rock of piety.” 228

Hermann Strack and Paul Billerbeck,

collecting all the New Testament

commentaries contained in the Talmud and

Midrash, give what scholars consider the

best, that is, the most likely rendering of

Matthew 16:18 in the original Aramaic, the language that Jesus would have spoken, and

translate the passage: “I also tell thee, even thee, Peter [repeated purely for emphasis]:

Upon this rock (upon the fact of my

Messianic calling and my being the Son of

God) I will build my society.” 229 “This interpretation is strengthened,” Olof Linton tells us, “by the fact that elsewhere in the primitive church it is always Christ and not Peter who is the foundation of the church.” 230

“The Tu es Petrus,” Goguel writes, very much to the point, “does not contain any of

the ecclesiastical theories that have been

subsequently discovered. It does not justify the authority either of bishops in general or of Rome in particular. It expresses only the fact that the church rests on faith in the

resurrection of Jesus and that Peter is the one who, when Christ appeared, had the first

revelation of the resurrection, the revelation

without which the faith in Jesus would not have survived his death.” 231

In his massive work, Tu es Petrus, G.

Jacquemet has supplied impressive

illustrations of the desperate ends to which defenders of the Roman claim must go to

make out a case. Peter’s reply and the Lord’s reply are, he says, “like a diptych, an

intentional parallelism, in which on the one hand Peter confessed the greatness of Christ, while on the other, Jesus proclaims the future greatness of Peter.” 232 But the essence of diptych and parallelism is in the equality of the members, and there is nothing parallel

about the tremendous, immeasurable

inequality of glory that must be between

these two. If Jacquemet is right and the Lord is really matching glory with glory and

power with power, then his glory in heaven

can be matched by only one thing—his glory

on earth—not Peter’s! “It is true,” says

Jacquemet, “that not a single textual citation of the central part of verse 18 exists before Tertullian. But that is so in the case of a very great number of New Testament verses. ”233

But when the verse in question happens to be put forward as the foundation of the church

and the most important verse in all the Bible, that silence becomes most significant. And

when that silence covers two hundred years

of controversy on the particular subject of

authority, and a desperate quest for some

central head or authority in the church, it

becomes fatal. The silence does not mean

that the verse is interpolated, as Harnack

argued, but it does mean at the very least that the verse was not regarded in the early

church as addressing the key problem of

authority. 234

Then Jacquemet comments on the question,

“Why does Mark (and hence Luke) omit ‘Tu

es Petrus?’ ”235 Jacquemet’s answer:

because Peter “out of humility, would have omitted anything that might be to his

praise.” 236 But Peter did not write the Gospel; Mark, Peter’s greatest admirer, did

—and that after his death! There are plenty

of praiseworthy things about Peter in the

Gospels. If the Lord’s commission to Peter is what the Romans say it is, this is no time for a pretty showing of bashfulness. The whole

foundation of the church depends on Mark’s

testimony; to hold back at such a time is

nothing short of betrayal of a trust. Does

Clement, for all his stammering and blushing as Peter seats him on his throne, fail to

declare his own calling in the letters

attributed to him? “Mark does not insist on

the organization of the church and so says

nothing about it,” says Jacquemet. “To

suppose that Mark must have given in detail

the origins of the history of the church … is a pretension devoid of all critical sense.” 237

But to suppose that Mark would not have given such a detailed account in an official history of Peter is even more difficult. Does not Jacquemet’s claim hold equally true of

Matthew, who tells almost the same story as

Mark and Luke do, and has far less reason

for glorifying Peter? That Mark in his short history should introduce and quote the very

conversation which culminated in the

promise to Peter without so much as hinting

at the purpose of the whole conversation is a proposition not only “devoid of all critical sense” but devoid of any sense at all.

Emperors, Popes, Synods, and Rome

The ways in which synods and emperors

figure in discussions of authority through the centuries are quite inconceivable. Had there been a widespread tradition of a central

religious authority anywhere in the church,

had there been even a pretense of such

authority, Cardinal Bellarmin would not have had to struggle and struggle in vain to show that in theory, at least, it is the pope who summons general synods. The real

question, says Hefele, of “who in fact called the general synods or who participated in the calling of the same must be answered thus:

the first eight general synods were

summoned by the emperors, whereas all

later ones were approved and subscribed by

the popes; but even in the former instances

there appears a certain participation of the popes in the convocation, which in separate

cases is sometimes more and others less

conspicuous.” 238 This Roman Catholic bishop does his best to make a case for

papal convocation, but what comfort is there in an “indication” that popes participated

more or less, when other great bishops were

equally active in the convocations? Or what

satisfaction in admitting papal supremacy

from the ninth council on? That is a late hour for asserting a rule that is supposed to date directly in immutable organization and full

majesty from the days of the apostles.

Hefele then lists the reasons for calling a

universal synod: “(1) In case of a dangerous heresy or synod; (2) when two popes stand

opposed to each other, and it is doubtful

which of them is the correct one; (3) for a

common undertaking against the enemies of

the Christian name; (4) when the pope stands in suspicion of heresy or other grave

offenses; (5) when the cardinals cannot or

will not proceed with a papal election;

(6) when it is a question of reforming the

church at the head and in its members.” 239 In all these situations, as at all councils, the main aim is ever, according to Hefele, “to

advance the good of the church through a

general consultation with its shepherds.” 240

Reflection on each of these points will show

that at least five of the six contingencies requiring a general synod would be

impossible if there were in the Roman

Church a divinely established head and a

proper order of succession. Hefele further

defines the ecumenical council as a meeting

of the bishops of all provinces summoned

and bound under the presidency of the pope

or his legates241—which completely rules out the first eight synods.

One of the earliest synods of Rome

mentioned by Joannes Dominicus Mansi is

described as “a divine and holy local synod

assembled in Rome, by the most blessed

Anicetus the pope of that place, and by

Polycarp the holy martyr and bishop of

Smyrna, and ten other bishops.” 242 Even though this passage is a forgery, the identical formula is given in Mansi, with different

names and bishops, of course, for the synods of Jerusalem, Caesarea, Lyons, Corinth, etc.,

so that his description not only gives no precedence to the bishop of Rome, but by

specifically describing him as “the bishop of that place” rules out any idea of the high and mighty authority that is now supposed by

some to have become his as bishop of the

whole church. It is as if one were to

introduce the vice president of the United

States presiding in the Senate as a notary

public. Soon after this we read in Mansi’s

work a long epistle from the patriarchs of the West to the patriarchs of the East regarding the election of an archbishop for “all of

Assyria, Medea, and Persia,” yet this

document, so vital for the whole church, East and West, contains no mention of Rome. 243

The absence of any awareness of a head in

the church, even as a tradition, comes out in such statements as that of Athanasius, that

“even though the fathers of both synods

[Nicaea and Antioch] held conflicting

opinions regarding the homoousios, we must not for that reason split up on one side or the other, but rather try to reconcile them.” 244

But whose business should it be to bring

such a reconciliation? Where is the head of

the church? Speaking of the Middle Ages in

general, Frederick Powicke writes: “The

Pope himself was not secure, for he was

bound by the decisions of the fathers and the great councils. He might err; he might be

condemned for heresy. His moral lapses, his

administrative errors, it is true, were matters for God alone [Bishop Hefele did not think

so], but the most unflinching papalists were agreed that his dogmatic errors were a

matter for the Church.” 245 If we look back to the most significant surviving account of the organization of the primitive church, the

Didache, we read that a prophet was to be tested by his life, but not by his doctrines. 246

How the tables are neatly reversed: the

man’s life is his own business, but his doctrines are subject to review.

Claims of Apostolic Succession

Vogels’s list of Ante-Nicene Texts

referring to the Roman Primacy247 is feeble and far-fetched in the extreme, but even less convincing is Batiffol’s discussion,

“Recourse to Rome in the Orient before the

Council of Chalcedon.” 248 The earliest instance of such recourse is that of

Athanasius. Denzinger goes back to the

sources to prove that Peter had successors:

the bull Unam Sanctam of 1302 is given as the main proof; the two other sources date

from A.D. 1351 and 1520. 249 The fact that the Roman claims are stated so clearly and

boldly in these documents makes it all the

more significant that they are the first.

Nothing more completely refutes the claim

to the existence in postapostolic times of a

central head in the church than those descriptions of church organization and

succession in the earliest apologists, which are commonly put forward in support of the

claim. First, there is the significant fact that the earliest fathers, when referring to the

church as an organization, confine

themselves not to speaking about “the

church” at all, but always use the plural,

“churches.” “The apostles,” says 1 Clement,

“foresaw the difficulties that would arise

regarding the office of bishop everywhere”

and so made a special ruling regarding the

successions of the bishops in the churches

which they established.250 The rule, as Clement’s own experience attests, was not

very effective, and he himself can only give the rather lame advice that “it is our opinion that those appointed by them [the apostles]

or afterwards by other eminent men, with the consent of the whole church … and who

have for a long time possessed the good opinion of all, cannot justly be dismissed

from the ministry.” 251

“As the book of Acts shows,” writes

Socrates, “the apostles were aware of many

differences in their own times already, and

since the apostles knew these would be the

cause of great disturbance among the

gentiles, they all came together and

formulated the holy law, which they wrote

down in the form of a letter, by which the

church of their time was freed from such

terrible affliction and troubles… . But the

teachings of this letter were distorted, and the injunctions of the apostles held as a thing of naught,” with the result that Socrates can report from personal observation that it

would be hard to find any two churches with

the same Easter rites, fasting, ordinances,

etc. 252 Surely there was a better way of directing the future of the church—namely,

through a continuation of its apostolic head, and we can be perfectly sure that that way

would have been followed if the apostles

had believed or expected for a moment that

the church was designed to remain on earth.

Imagine confining all their instructions to a letter. Clement here is as vague and helpless as Socrates.

The Argument of Diffusion

At a time when the church was swarming

with heresies so clever and convincing that

only an expert could possibly detect them,

Irenaeus took upon himself the task of

proving to a perplexed world which of many

conflicting sects was the right one. “The true gnosis,” he says, “which is the teaching of

the apostles and the original system common

to the church throughout the world and the

character of the body of Christ after the

successions of the bishops, transmitted to

each of them as the church was set up in his particular place, has come down to us.” He

goes on to say that this treasure takes the

form of “the legitimate interpretation of the scriptures,” which, he says, is “more

precious than the gnosis, more glorious than the gift of prophecy, super eminent above all other gifts of the spirit. ”253 Which shows, incidentally, how much more highly the

churchmen esteemed a dead prophet than a

living one and preferred intellectual

exercises to direct revelation. But how does Irenaeus prove the divinity and correctness

of the doctrine of his church? “The church,”

he writes, “although it is scattered abroad

throughout all the inhabited world, still since it received its faith teachings from the

apostles and from their disciples,” teaches

the same as we do.254 “This teaching was accepted by the church, though scattered in

all parts of the world, and carefully guarded

as if dwelling in a single house. And believing uniformly in these matters, as

having one soul and one and the same heart,

and with perfect harmony it announces these

things and teaches them … as if speaking

with a single mouth. And though various

languages prevail throughout the world there is but a single and uniform force to this

tradition. Neither the Germans, the Iberians, the Celts, the Egyptians, the Libyans, nor

those in the middle of the world teach

otherwise. But like the sun, God’s creature, it is everywhere equal and the same. ”255 And again: “But those of the true church, though they are spread around the entire world, all have the same doctrine of the Father, since

they have the firm tradition from the

apostles, and this gives us all a remarkably uniform faith.” 256

This is Irenaeus’s one crushing argument

against the heretics, his one conclusive

proof. And it derives its entire force from the fact that widely scattered churches preach

identical doctrines even when there has been no collusion among them. If there were a

central head to bring the churches into

harmony, then the argument would be

meaningless. Irenaeus insists that close

agreement concerning doctrine among the

churches can only be explained on one

ground: that they all go back to the common

apostolic origins. If we want to know what

the true old teaching was, he says elsewhere, go to those churches in out-of-the-way

places, at the edges of the world, where the people are illiterate and so have preserved

the faith intact in their hearts since the time of the apostles. This is the argument of

diffusion, the very opposite of the argument of centralization. If the apostles had

established a single official source and

control for doctrine, that would, of course,

be the thing to which Irenaeus would appeal to argue against the heretics setting up their own centers—it was to Rome, in fact, that

much later fathers did appeal. But Irenaeus

rests his whole demonstration on the

proposition that the remarkable uniformity of doctrine found among churches scattered in

all parts of the world is evidence for the

apostolic origin of the doctrines in question since such widespread agreement can only

be explained by looking back to the days of

the apostles. 257 Jerome can still argue against the Jews that “the house of prayer is the church, which is divided in all parts of the world, and not the temple of the Jews,

limited as it is to a single narrow spot.” 258

Jerome did not know that four hundred years

later High Mass would be confined to just

one spot in the world and limited to the

offices of but a single man—that is the very centralization which he here charges against

the Jews.

Three hundred years after Irenaeus,

Optatus tangles with a new brand of heresy

and uses all the arguments of Irenaeus and

more. His favorite argument is that the true church must be found throughout the whole

world, while most heretic sects are local

phenomena. Over and over he repeats:

“Catholic means, ubiqui diffusa.” 259 Of course it means nothing of the sort; if he

wants to press the meaning of universal, it does not mean “every where” but

“every body. ” But no one knows better than the raging Optatus that his church does not

include everybody—that is why he is so

perturbed. So he must insist that it means the church is everywhere and use that as his one unanswerable argument against heretical

churches. But why the icy silence regarding

Rome? That would be a stronger argument

than the test of universal diffusion, but

Optatus never uses it. “From every valley the catholic population is gathered,” writes

Ambrose. “There are many congregations,

but only one congregation, one church. ”260

But while on this theme he never mentions

wherein this miraculous unity resides: there is no word of Rome or Peter.

Let us hold a peaceful assembly as in the

good old days, says Basil in a heartfelt

appeal for leadership. “It was the price of

the church in those days that from one end of the empire to the other the brethren of each church could come together with new

controls and be fathers and brothers to each other. Today … letters are sent out in the

names of cities, and each society regards its neighbor with suspicion.” 261 This clearly shows that the rise of the great city

bishoprics was a phenomenon of the fourth

century—a characteristic phenomenon of that

power-made age—and that it was resented

by the better men. “Since all who hoped in Christ make up a single people, and all of

Christ’s people today make up a single

church, though named for different regions,

the patria and the oikonomia of the Lord rejoice and will not believe that any one man can hold supreme authority, but that all things are managed by one church.” 262 Basil recalls the doctrine that an angel went about visiting the churches—“the angel of the churches,” an interesting survival of the days of a traveling apostolate. 263

Irenaeus repeats the doctrine of diffusion:

The church received this doctrine and faith

and carefully preserved it, though scattered throughout the entire world. Here again the

operation of a central controlling head is

ruled out, as if living in a single house. Yet the church believes these things as having a single soul and a single heart, preaching

them harmoniously and transmitting them as

if with a single mouth. Though our languages are different, the power of the tradition is one and the same, whether in Germany, Gaul,

Iberia, Egypt, or Libya.264 In his laborious attempts to bolster this argument with all

sorts of rhetoric, Epiphanius displays the

weakness of his position, yet never once

does he use what would be the crushing

argument to all heretic groups were it

available: that the apostolic authority is still visibly operative and clearly located. What

we have, says he, is a “firm agreement based on the Law, Prophets, gospels, apostles

…”265

Notes

1. Difficultates, quibus scatet primorum Petri successorum tum chronologia, tum successio evolvere nostri non est institati. Domnus Renatus Masseutus, in J.-P. Migne, ed., Patrologiae Cursus Completus … Series Graeca, 161 vols. (Paris: Migne, 1857–66) ,

7:849 n. 63 (hereafter PG).

2. Henri Leclercq, “Historiens du Christianisme: XXXVII. Monsignor Duchesne,” Dictionaire d’Archéologie Chrétienne et de Liturgie, 6.2.2697–98.

3. The Knights of Columbus Foundation for the Preservation of Historic Documents at the Vatican Library (1952 brochure), 7.

4. Ibid.

5. “En 1888, à un de ses amis ayant perdu la foi, il écrivait: «N’ayez pas peur que je succombe à la tentation. … Tous les ans je fais une

retraite de deux mois sous la direction de ma mère, qui a lâge du siècle, et d’une foule

degens respectables, prêtres et laïces, dont aucun ne se doute du bien qu’il me fait. Je ne lâcherai pas ce paradis pour le plaisir d’être d’accord sur tous les points avec moi-même.

Cependant je constate qu’on n’a pas tout à

fait raison de se faire socinien. Ni la Trinité, ni l’Incarnation ne me choquent. Si j’hésitais, ce serait plutôt devant le Dieu personnel et

créateur.»” Leclercq, “Historiens du

Christianisme,” 6.2.2696.

6. Beatus Petrus … primum sedit cathedram episcopatus in Antiochia annos VII. Hic

Petrus ingressus in urbe Roma, Nerone

Caesare, ibique sedit cathedram episcopatus ann. XXV m. II d. III… . Hic ordinavit duos episcopos, Linum et Cletum, qui

praesentaliter omne ministerium sacerdotale in urbe Roma … beatus autem Petrus ad

orationem et praedicationem, populum

erudiens, vacabat… . Hic beatum Clementem episcopum consecravit, eique cathedram vel ecclesiam omnem disponendam commisit,

dicens: «Sicut mihi gubernandi tradita est a domino meo Iesu Christo potestas ligandi solvendique, ita et ego tibi committo … tu minime in curis saeculi deditus repperiaris; sed solummodo ad orationem et praedicare populo vacare stude.» Louis Duchesne, Le Liber Pontificalis: Texte, Introduction et Commentaire (Paris: de Boccard, 1955), 118.

7. PG 1:463–84, 483–90; 2:32–56, 469–604.

8. Κλἠμς Ὶακώβῳ τῷ κυρίῳ, καὶ έπισκόπῳ, καὶ

έπισκόπων έπισκόπῳ, τῷ τἡν Ἱερουσαλἡμ

άγίαν τῶν Χριστιανῶν Έκκλησίαν διέποντι,

καὶ τὰϛ πανταχῆ θεοῦ προνοίᾳ ἰδρυθείσαϛ

καλῶϛ Χριστοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ ήμῶν Έκκλησίαϛ.

Epitome de Gestis Sancti Petri, prolegomena, in PG 2:469.

9. τρίτοϛ γὰρ μετὰ Πέτρον τὸν μέγαν τὸν

ὑψηλὸν τῆϛ ῥωμαίων Έκκλησίαϛ θρόνον

καθίσαϛ. Epitome de Gestis Sancti Petri 149, in PG 2:580.

10. διὸ αὐτῷ μεταδίδωμι τῆϛ ἐξουσίαϛ τοῦ

δεσμεῖν τε καὶ λύειν. Epitome de Gestis

Sancti Petri 145, in PG 2:577.

11. ταῦτα εἰπών, καὶ ἐπὶ πάντων μοι τὰϛ χείρας

ἐπθείς, εἰς τὴν αὐτοῦ με καθέδραν

καθεσθῆναι πεποίηκε· καθεσθέντι δέ, τοῦτό

μοι εὐθέως ἔφη· Ἀξιῶ σε ἐπὶ πάντων μου

συμπαρόντων ἀδελφῶν, ὁπηνίκα τοῦ ἐνταῦθα

μεταστῶ βίου ; πάντα τῷ κυρίῳ Ἰακώβῳ τῷ

ἀδελφῷ τοῦ Κυρίου μου, ἐν ἐπιτομῇ

ἀναγραψάμενον διαπέμψαι ; ὡς ἐπ̓ ἀρχῆς

μέχρι νῦν μοι συνώδευσας; . Μεγίστης δὲ

παραμυθίας τεύξεται μαθών, ὅτι μετ̓ ἐμὲ οὐκ

ἀμαθὴς ἀνὴρ καὶ ξωοποιοὺς ἀγνοῶν λόγους,

Ἐκκλησίας δὲ κανόνα εἰδὼς μάλιστα, τὴν

διδάσκοντος ἐπιστεύθη καθέδραν. Epitome

de Gestis Sancti Petri 147, in PG 2:580.

12. ταῦτα εἰπών, καὶ ἐπὶ πάντων μοι τὰς χείρας

ἐπιθείς, εἰς τὴν αὐτοῦ με καθέδραν

καθεσθῆναι πεποίηκε· καθεσθέντι δέ, τοῦτό

μοι εὐθέως ἔϕη· Ἀξιῶ σε ἐπὶ πάντων μου

συμπαρόντων ἀδελϕῶν, ὁπηνίκα τοῦ ἐνταῦθα

μεταστῶ βίου, ὡϛ ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ κέκρικε

πρόνοια, πάντα τῷ κυρίῳ Ἰακώβῳ τῷ ἀδελϕῷ

τοῦ Κυρίου μου, ἐν ἐπιτομῇ ἀναγραψάμενον

διαπέμψαι, μέχρι καὶ τῶν ἐκ παιδὸϛ σου

λοισμῶν, καὶ ὡϛ ἐπ᾿ ἀρχῆϛ μέχρι νῦν μοι

συνώδευσας; . Οὐ γὰρ αὐτὸν λυπήσει τοῦτο,

εἰδότα σαϕῶς ὅτι ὃ πάντως ἔδει με παθῖν

εὐσεβὼς ἀποδέδωκα. Μεγίστης δὲ

παραμυθίας τεύξεται μαθών, ὅτι μετ᾽ ἐμὲ οὐκ

ἀμαθὴς ἀνὴρ καὶ ζωοποιοὺς ἀγνοῶν λόγους,

Ἐκκλησίας δὲ κανόνα εἰδὼς μάλιστα, τὴν

διδάσκοντος ἐπιστεύθη καθέδραν. Epitome

de Gestis Sancti Petri 147, in PG 2:580.

13. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum 19, in PG

2:56.

14. Scimus enim beatissimum Jacobum, qui dicebatur Justus, que etiam secundum

carnem frater Domini nuncupatus est, a

Petro, Jacobo et Joanne apostolis, Hierosolymorum episcopum esse ordinatum.

Anicetus, Epistola ad Galliae Episcopos 1, in PG 5:1129–30.

15. οἶδα δὲ αὐτός, ὦ Κλήμης, λύπας καὶ ἀθυμίας

καὶ κινδύνους καὶ ψόγους ἐξ ἀπαιδεύτων

ὄχλων σοι δωρούμος. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum 4, in PG 2:37.

16. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum 5–6, in PG

2:40–41.

17. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum 14–16, in PG

2:49–52.

18. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum 3–4, in PG

2:36–40.

19. ἐάν σε πολλοὶ τῶν ἀδελϕῶν διὰ τὴν ἄκρον

δικαιοσύν μισήσωσιν, τὸ αὐτῶν μὲν μῖσος

οὐδέν σε βλάψει. Clement, Epistola ad

Jacobum 16, in PG 2:40–41.

20. Ἀξιῶ σε ἐπὶ πάντων μου συμπαρόντων

ἀδελϕῶν, ὁπηνίκα τοῦ ἐνταῦθα μεταστῶ

βίου, ὡς ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ κέκρικε πρόνοια, πάντα

τῷ κυρίῳ Ἰακώβῳ τῷ ἀδελϕῷ τοῦ Κυρίου

μου, ἐν ἐπιτομῇ ἀναγραψάμενον διαπέμψαι,

μέχρι καὶ τῶν ἐκ παιδὸς σου λογισμῶν, καὶ

ὡς ἐπ᾽ ἀρχῆς μέχρι νῦν μοι συνώδευσας; .

Οὐ γὰρ αὐτὸν λυπήσει τοῦτο, εἰδότα σαϕῶς

ὅτι ὃ πάντως ἔδει με παθεῖν εὐσεβὼς

ἀποδέδωκα. Μεγίστης δὲ παραμυθίας

τεύξεται μαθών, ὅτι μετ᾽ ἐμὲ οὐκ ἀμαθὴς

ἀνὴρ καὶ ζωοποιοὺς ἀγνοῶν λόγους,

Ἐκκλησίας δὲ κανόνα εἰδὼς μάλιστα, τὴν

διδάσκοντος ἐπιστεύθη καθέδραν. Epitome

de Gestis Sancti Petri 147, in PG 2:580.

21. Apostolic Constitutions 7.46.15, in PG

1:1056a.

22. Recognitiones Clementinae 3.66, in PG

1:1311.

23. “[Ich bin der Meinung] daß das betreffende Stück von dem Homilisten zur Ausfüllung

einer durch Versetzung von

Disputationsstoffen entstandenen Lücke

eigenmächtig fabriziert ist.” Carl Schmidt,

Studien zu den Pseudo-Clementinen nebst

einem Anhange: Die älteste römische

Bischofsliste und die Pseudo-Clementinen, Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der

altchristlichen Literatur 46.1 (Leipzig:

Hinrichs, 1930), 101, 332–33.

24. Homiliae Clementinae 3:60–72, in PG

2:149–57.

25. θρόνον οὖν Χριστοῦ τιμήσετε· ὅτι καὶ

Μωῢσέως καθέδραν τιμᾶν ἐκελεύσθητε.

Homiliae Clementinae 3.70, in PG 2:156.

26. Kirsopp Lake, “The Shepherd of Hermes and Christian Life in Rome in the Second

Century,” Harvard Theological Review 4

(1911): 37.

27. Hic ordinavit duos episcopos, Linum et Cletum, qui praesentaliter omne ministerium sacerdotale in urbe Roma populo vel

supervenientium exhiberent; beatus autem Petrus ad orationem et praedicationem,

populum erudiens, vacabat. Duchesne, Le Liber Pontificalis, 118.

28. Ideo propterea Linus et Cletus ante

[Clementem] conscribuntur, eo quod ab ipso principe apostolorum ad ministerium

sacerdotale exhibendum sunt episcopi

ordinati. Duchesne, Le Liber Pontificalis, 123.

29. τῆς δὲ Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας Λῖνος μὲν ὁ

Κλαυδίας πρῶτος ὑπὸ Παύλου, Κλήμης δὲ

μετὰ τὸν Λίνου θάνατον ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ Πέτρου

δεύτερος κεχειροτόνηται. Constitutiones

Apostolicae 7.46.6, in PG 1:1052–53.

30. PG 5:1096.

31. Heinrich Denzinger, Enchiridion Symbolorum Definitionum et Declarationum de Rebus Fidei et Morum, 31st ed. (Rome: Herder, 1957), 2–3.

32. Optatus has his own list (J.-P. Migne, ed., Patrologiae Cursus Completus … Series Latina/Rom, 221 vols. [Paris: Migne, 1844–

64], 11:947–950 [hereafter PL]), which omits Cletus, as do also Irenaeus ( Contra Haereses 3.3.3., in PG 7:849–51), Eusebius ( Historia Ecclesiastica 5.6, in PG 20:445), and Augustine ( Epistola 53.2, in PL 33:196).

Pighi, however, includes Cletus and omits

Anacletus. See Giovanni Battista Pighi,

Institutiones Historiae Ecclesiasticae ad Vota Leonis XIII in Epistola “Saepenumero,”

18 Augusti 1883 (Verona: Cinquetti, 1906), 9–122.

33. “Man hatte in Rome sich wenig um die eigene Vergangenheit gekümmert, deshalb

konnte die Sammlung nur höchst dürftig ausfallen.” Schmidt, Studien zu den Pseudo-Clementinen nebst einem Anhange, 387.

34. Epiphanius, Adversus Octaginta Haereses 41.1, in PG 41:692.

35. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum, in PG 2:32–

33.

36. ὀ Κλήμης, τῆς Ῥωμαίων καὶ αὐτὸς

ἐκκλησίας τρίτος ἐπίσκοπος καταστάς,

Παύλου συνεργός γεγονέναι. Eusebius,

Historia Ecclesiastica 3.4.9, in PG 20:221.

37. μετὰ τὴν Παύλου καὶ Πέτρου μαρτυρίαν.

Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 3.2, in PG

20:216.

38. ὅσοι δὲ τούτων καὶ τίνες γνήσιοι ζηλωταὶ

γεγονότες τὰς πρὸς αὐτῶν ἱδρυθείσας ἱκανοὶ

ποιμαίνειν ἐδοκιμάσθησαν ἐκκλησίας, οὐ

ῥᾴδιον εἰπεῖν, μὴ ὅτι γε ὅσους ἄν τις ἐκ τῶν

Παύλου φωνῶν ἀναλέξοιτο· τούτου γὰρ οὖν

μυρίοι συνεργοὶ ; ὧν οἱ πλείους ἀλήστου

πρὸς αὐτοῦ μνήμης ἠξίωνται. Eusebius,

Historia Ecclesiastica 3.4.3–4, in PG 2:220.

39. “Bis ins erste Drittel des dritten Jahrhunderts hinein [sind die Bischofsliste] typische

Chronographenmache ohne jeden Überlieferungswert, und die Möglichkeit,

bestimmte Daten für die römischen Bischöfe

fortzulegen, ist somit erst viel später gegeben, als nach die kritische Forschung bisher

angenommen hat.” Erich Caspar, Geschichte des Papsttums von den Anfängen bis zur

Höhe der Weltherrschaft, 2 vols. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1930), 13.

40. “Si Pierre est venu à Rome, ce qui, en tout cas, ne peut être catégoriquement nié dans

l’ignorance totale où nous sommes de ce qu’il est devenu après son séjour à Antioche, sa

présence n’y a pas laissé de souvenirs directs et profonds.” Maurice Goguel, Jésus et les Origines du Christianisme: L’Église

Primitive (Paris: Boulevard St. Germain, 1947), 230.

41. “Soit qu’il y ait séjourné trop peu de temps pour avoir pu y développer son influence, soit qu’il y ait trouvé une Église déjà trop

fortement organisée et ayant trop sa

physionomie propre pour avoir pu être

fortement influencée par un nouveau venu.

Une génération après la date qui serait celle de sa mort, s’il était venu à Rome, Clément

Romain n’a rien de précis à dire à son sujet et si, dans la suite, on s’est cru mieux renseigné, si on a raconté qu’il avait fondé la

communauté romaine et avait été son premier

évêque, si on s’est cru en état de raconter son martyre et sa sépulture, ce n’est certainement pas parce que, entre temps, on aurait

découvert des documents restés inconnus à

Clément et aux écrivains de la première moitié du second siècle. On ne peut se contenter de l’idée d’un simple travail de l’imagination

populaire.” Goguel, Jésus et les Origines du Christianisme, 230.

42. PG 1–2.

43. εἷς Θεός, εἷς Χριστός, εἷς ἐπίσκοπος.

Theodoret, Historia Ecclesiastica 2.14, in PG 82:1041.

44. Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 3 vols. (New York: Heritage, 1946), 1:628.

45. Jerome, Chronicon, a. 370 (= 366), in PL

27:505–6.

46. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 4.29, in PG 67:541.

47. ἐστασίαζον οὖν πρὸς ἑαυτούς, οὐ διά τινα

πίστιν ἢ αἵρεσιν, ἀλλὰ περὶ τοῦ μόνον τὶς

ὀφείλει τοῦ ἐπισκόπου θρόνου ἐγκρατὴς

γενέσθαι. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 4.29, in PG 67:541.

48. ἐντευ·θεν δὲ συμπληγαδες τῶν ὄχλων

ἐγίνοντο. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 4.29, in PG 67:541.

49. Eodem tempore contentio orst est in urbe Roma inter Symmachum et Laurentiam;

consecrati fuerant ambo. Ordinatio deo, qui et dignus fuit, superavit Symmachus.

Ammianus Marcellinus, Excerpta Valesiana 12.65.

50. χειροτονοῦσι Σύμμαχον ἕνα ὄντα τῶν

διακόνων, ἔνθεν λοιπὸν ἀταξίαι πολλαὶ καὶ

φόνοι καὶ ἁρπαγαὶ γεγόνασιν ἐπὶ τρία ἔτη.

Theophanes, Chronographia 493, in PG

108:344.

51. Cassiodorus, Variae 9.15, in PL 69:778–81.

52. Source unidentified.

53. Sed diabolus, qui ad detrimentum hominum

semper insistere nititur et veluti leo quaerit circumeundo quem devoret, huic

adversarium quendam nomine Guidbertum,

superbiae stimulis inritatum, ad confusionem populi concitavit. Qui dudum imperatoris praefate Baioariorum protervitate suffultus, dum praedecessor Gregorius, qui et

Hildebrandus, in sede iure habebatur,

apostolatus officium usurpare coepit, ipso Gregorio a liminibus basilicae S. Petri

excluso. Et quia sic perverse egit, populus melior eum cognoscere noluit, Urbano autem iure electo et ab episcopis cardinalibus consecrato, maior et sanctior pars populi post Hildebrandi excessum oboediendo

aspiravit. Guidbertus vero sustentamine

imperatoris praedicti et plerorumque civium Romanorum inritamento animatus, Urbanum

quamdiu potuit a monasterio beati Petri

alienum fecit. Sed dum ab ecclesia sic

eliminatus erat, per regiones incedens,

populum in aliquantis devium Deo

conciliabat. Guidbertus autem ob ecclesiae principatum turgidus papam proclivem

oberrantibus se ostentabat et apostolatus officum, licet iniuste, inter consentientes exercebat et Urbani facta tamquam inrita vilipendebat. Urbanus autem eo anno, quo Franci primitus Iherusalem euntes per

Romam transierunt, totam omnino

potestatem apostolicam adeptus est, auxilio cuiusdam nobilissimae matronae, Mathildis nomine, quae in Romana patria potestate

multa tunc vigebat. Guidbertus vero tunc in Alemmania erat. Itaque duo papae Romae

praeerant; sed cui oboediretur, a

quamplurimis ignorabatur, vel a quo

consilium posceretur, vel quis aegrotis

mederetur. alii huic, alii alteri favebant.

Fulcher of Chartres, Historia

Hierosolymitana 1.5.1–1.5.6, ed. Heinrich Hagenmeyer (Heidelberg: Winters, 1913).

54. Prout intelectibus hominum patebat, Urbanus iustior erat: putandus est recte melior qui cupiditates tamquam hostes

subiicit. Fulcher, Historia Hierosolymitana 1.5.7.

55. Sceptrum imperii Dei. Sane non est vi

rapiendum, verum cum timore et devotione suscipiendum. Nec mirum si mundus

inquietabatur totus et conturbabatur,

quoniam si Romana ecclesia, in qua

principalitas correctionis universae

Christianitatis obtinetur, quolibet turbine confunditur, confestim accidit membra sibi subdita, a capitaneis fibris dolore derivante, compassibiliter debilitari… . Cumque caput sic tritum est, continuo membra laesa sunt.

Fulcher, Historia Hierosolymitana 1.5.8–

1.5.10.

56. Capite autem sic laeso, etiam membris marcescentibus dolore concepto, quia in

partibus omnibus Europae pax, bonitas,

fides, in ecclesias et extra, tam a maioribus quam minoribus viriliter subigebantur,

necesse erat ut … contra paganos saltem

certamina inter se dudum consueta

distenderent. Fulcher, Historia Hierosolymitana 1.5.11.

57. Et cum in basilica beati Petri introissemus, invenimus ante altare homines Guidberti

papae stolidi, qui oblationes altari

superpositas, gladios suos in manibustenentes, inique adripiebant; alii vero super trabes ipsius monasterii

cursitabant et inde deorsum ubi prostrati orabamus labides iaciebant. Nam cum

viderent aliquem Urbano fidelem, ilico eum trucidare volebant. In arce autem una

basilicae inerant homenes domini Urbani, qui eam sollicite custodiebant in eiusdem fidelitatem, et adversantibus sibi, prout poterant, obsistebant. Proinde satis

doluimus, cum tantam atrocitatem ibi fieri vidimus. Fulcher, Historia Hierosolymitana 1.7.2–1.7.3.

58. Sir John Froissart, Chronicles of England, France, Spain, and the Adjoining Countries: From the Latter Part of the Reign of Edward II to the Coronation of Henry IV, trans.

Thomas Johnes (New York: Green’s Son,

1882), 326–27 (2:131–32).

59. Ibid. , 327 (2:133).

60. Ibid. , 388 (3:23).

61. Ibid.

62. Ibid. , 390 (3:25).

63. Ibid.

64. “Mehr und mehr gewöhnten sich die Päpste, in Glaubenssachen, bei Verwaltung der

Bistümer, Klöster und der Kirchenländer,

endlich in Fragen der äußeren Politik ihre

Entscheidungen unter Zuziehung des Beirats

des Kollegs herbeizuführen und sich dabei

außerdem vielfach der Dienste einzelne

Kardinäle zu bedienen. Um 1300 hatten die

Kardinäle ihre bevorrechtigte Stellung als

Berater des Papstes beriets so weit gefestigt.”

Martin Souchon, Die Papstwahlen in der Zeit des Grossen Schismas: Entwicklung und

Verfassungskämpfe des Kardinalates von

1378 bis 1417 (Darmstadt: Scientia Verlag Aalen, 1970), 1:3.

65. Verum, decursu aetatum, factum est ut hae de Romano eligendo Pontifice indictae ac promulgatae leges sensim multiplici

varioque numero augerentur … ita ut haud exigui laboris esse videatur discernere

quaenam in Summo Pastore eligendo

servanda sint. Nos igitur … omnia in unam Constitutionem digerere opportunum

duximus … quae veneranda vetustas sanctivit, nonnullis tamen mutatis.

Constitutio de Sede Apostolica Vacante.

66. Sedis Apostolicae vacatione durante, S.

Collegium Cardinalium in iia, quae ad

Pontificem Maximum dum viveret

pertinebant, nullam omnino potestatem aut iurisdictionem habeat … sed ea omnia futuro Pontifici reservare teneatur. Constitutio de Sede Apostolica Vacante 1.

67. Item praecipimus, ne S. Cardinalium Collegium de iuribus Sedis Apostolicae

Romanaeque Ecclesiae quomodolibet

disponere valeat. Constitutio de Sede Apostolica Vacante 2.

68. Leges a Romanis Pontificibus latae, per coetum Cardinalium Romanae Ecclesiae,

ipsa vacante, corrigi, vel immutari nullo mode possunt. Constitutio de Sede Apostolica Vacante 3.

69. Constitutio de Sede Apostolica Vacante 4.

70. Constitutio de Sede Apostolica Vacante 5.

71. S. R. E. Camerarii et Poenitentiarii Maioris officia non cessant per obitum

Pontificis. Constitutio de Sede Apostolica Vacante 12.

72. Constitutio de Sede Apostolica Vacante 23.

73. Testor Christum Dominum, qui me iudicaturus est, me eligere, quem secundum Deum iudico eligi debere. Constitutio de Sede Apostolica Vacante 67.

74. Lord Macaulay, The History of England from the Accession of James the Second, 2

vols. (London: Longmans, Green, 1886),

1:356.

75. οὐδὲ μὴν εἰς τὸν τόπον αὐτοῦ ἀπεστάλκει

τινά· καίτοι κανόνος ἐκκλησιαστικοῦ

κελεύοντος, μὴ δεῖν παρὰ τὴν γνώμην τοῦ

ἐπισκόπου Ῥώμης, τὰς ἐκκλησίας κανονίζειν.

Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 2.8, in PG 67:196; see Karl Joseph von Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, trans. a Benedictine monk of St. Michael’s Abbey in Farnborough,

10 vols. (Paris: Letouzey et Ané, 1907) , 1:13.

76. “Poser en principe des ordonnances générales par et dans un synode.” Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents

Originaux, 1:13, emphasis in original.

77. “Gouvernait … sans interposition de métropolitains, un très grand nombre

d’églises.” Louis Duchesne, Origines du culte chrétien: Étude sur la Liturgie Latine avant Charlemagne, 5th ed. (Paris: de Boccard, 1925), 23.

78. “… qu’un appel à Rome pourrait rétablir ses affaires.” Louis Duchesne, Histoire Ancienne de l’Église, 5th ed. (Paris: de Boccard, 1929), 2:661.

79. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 2.15, in PG 67:212.

80. ἢ διὰ πειθοῦς τινος, ἤ, ἵνα ἀληθέστερον

εἴπω, κοσμικῆς δυναστείας. Socrates

Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 4.12, in PG 67:493.

81. Denzinger, Enchiridion Symbolorum, items 57b, 57e, 87.

82. Duchesne, Histoire Ancienne de l’Église, 2:661–63.

83. ἐρρωμένον σε ; καὶ τὴν συνήθη τῶν τε

ἁγίων ἐκκλησιῶν, καὶ τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἄρχης

κηδεμονίαν ἐπιδεικνύμενον. Cyril, Epistola

ad Constantium Imperatorem 8, in PG

33:1173.

84. episcopus episcoporum. Tertullian, De pudicitia 1, in PL 2:981.

85. Source unidentified.

86. Hugo Koch, Cathedra Petri: Neue Untersuchungen über die Anfänge der

Primatslehre (Giessen: Töpelmann, 1933), 114.

87. Andreas Alföldi, The Conversion of Constantine and Pagan Rome, trans. Harold Mattingly (Oxford: Clarendon, 1948), 116.

88. “Le développement de la tradition sur Pierre à Rome et, plus encore, l’importance qu’on

lui a donnée et les conséquences qu’on en a

tirées ont été si exactement parallèles au

développement du rôle de l’Église de Rome et à la croissance de son autorité qu’on est obligé de conclure à une relation organique. C’est en tant qu’expression et en même temps que

justification de la position particulière de l’Église de Rome que la tradition sur Pierre s’est affirmée et développée.” Goguel, Jésus et les Origines du Christianisme, 231.

89. Pierre Batiffol, Cathedra Petri: Études d’Histoire ancienne de l’Église (Paris: de la Tour Maubourg, 1938), 105–21.

90. Adolf Jülicher, “Die Synode von Elvira als Zeuge für den römischen Primat,” Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte 42 (1923): 45.

91. Hugo Koch, “Bischofsstuhl und Priesterstühle zu Canon 58 von Elvira,”

Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte n.s. 7

(1925): 171.

92. “Existe-t-il, sur terre, une instance qualifiée pour connaître d’une accusation contre le

Pontife romain?” Victor Martin, Les Origines du Gallicanisme (Paris: Bloud et Gay, 1939), 2:10.

93. “Déjà en 495, saint Gélase affirme que le siège de Rome peut se prononcer sur toutes

les causes et que personne n’a qualité pour

modifier ses arrêts.” Martin, Les Origines du Gallicanisme, 2:10.

94. “Es kam die Rechtfiktion auf, daß die Urapostel und Paulus in allen von ihnen

gestifteten Gemeinden monarchische Bischöfe

eingesetzt und diese in ununterbrochener

Reihe kraft des ihnen bei der Ordination mitgeteilten Geistes die apostolische, reine Lehre bewahrt haben… . Die Bischofsliste der großen Gemeinden [wurden], bald nachdem

die Theorie durchgedrungen war, nach

rückwärts bis zu den Aposteln ergänzt.”

Eduard Schwartz, Kaiser Constantin und die Christliche Kirche (Stuttgart: Teubner, 1969), 24.

95. ἡ γὰρ πόλις οὐκ ἀπὸ τῶν οἰκοδομῶν, ἀλλὰ

ἀπὸ τῶν ἐνοίκων θαυμάζεται. μὴ μοι λέγε,

ὅτι ἡ Ῥωμαίων πόλις μεγάλη τῷ μεγέθεῖ ἀλλ᾽

δεῖξόν μοι ἐκεῖ οὕτω λαὸν φιλήκοον. ἐπεὶ καὶ

τὰ Σόδομα πύργους εἶχεν, ἡ δὲ καλύβη τοῦ

Ἀβραάμ· ἀλλ᾽ ἔλθοντες οἱ ἄγγελοι, τὰ μὲν

Σόδομα παρέδραμον, ἐπὶ δὲ καλύβην

κατήχθησαν; . εἴσελθε εἰς ἐκκλησίαν, καὶ

βλέπε τῆς πόλεως τὴν εὐγένειαν. εἴσελθε, ἰδὲ

πένητας ἐκ μεσονυκτίων μέχρι τῆς ἡμέρας

παραμένοντας, βλέπε παννυχίδας ἱερὰς ἡμέρᾳ

καὶ νυκτὶ συναφθείσας; . μεγάλη πόλις, καὶ

μητρόπολις τῆς οἰκουμένης. πόσοι ἐπίσκοποι,

πόσοι διδάσκαλοι ἦλθον ἐνταῦθα, καὶ

παιδευθέντες παρὰ τοῦ λαοῦ ἀναχώρουσι, καὶ

τὸν νόμον τὸν ἔμφυτον ἐντεῦθεν

μεταφυτεῦσαι παρασκευάζονται. John

Chrysostom, In Illud, Vidi Dominum

Homilia 4.1, in PG 56:120.

96. οὕτως ἀεί τῆς ἀληθείας τὸ κράτος, κἂν παρ᾽

ὀλίγοις τέως εὐρίσκηται; . ποῖον δὲ μοι καὶ

πλῆθος λέγεις; τὸ μισθωθὲν καλοκείᾳ καὶ

δώροις, τὸ κλαπὲν ἁμαθείᾳ καὶ ἀγνοίᾳ, τὸ

πεπτωκὸς δειλίᾳ τε καὶ φόβῳ, τὸ προτιμῆσαν

πρόσκαιρον ἁμαρτίας ἀπόλαυσιν τῆς αἰωνίου

ζωῆς, ἅπερ πολλοὶ φανερῶς ὡμολόγησαν:

πλήθει τὸ ψεῦδος κρατύνεις. Athanasius,

Confutationes quarumdam propositionum 1, in PG 28:1340–41.

97. John Bligh, “The ‘Edict of Milan’: Curse or Blessing?” Church Quarterly Review 153

(1952): 311.

98. [Petrus et Paulus], uno, eodemque die, gloriosa morte … agonizans … et pariter

supradictam Romam Ecclesiam Christo

Domino consecrarent. Damasus, Epistola de Explanatione Fidei, in PL 13:374.

99. ἐγὼ Παῦλος καὶ Πέτρος διατασσόμεθα.

Constitutiones Apostolicae 8.33.1, in PG

1:1133.

100. Prima ergo sedes est caelesti beneficio Romanae Ecclesiae quam (ut memoratum

est) beatissimi Petrus et Paulus suo martyrio consecrarunt. Anacletus, Epistola 3.3, in PG

2:813.

101. Aetheria (Silvia), Peregrinatio ad Loca Sancta, 4th ed. (Heidelberg: Heraeus, 1939).

102. Quia [Marcus] … directus a Petro, praedicavit, et gloriosum suscepit

martyrium. Anacletus, Epistola 3.3, in PG

2:814.

103. Anacletus, Epistola 3.4, in PG 2:815.

104. διὰ τοῦτο καὶ Πέτρος καὶ Παῦλος καὶ

[Ἰγνάτιος] ἐκεῖ πάντες ἐτύθησαν· τοῦτο μὲν

ἵνα μολυνθεῖσαν τὴν πόλιν τοῖς τῶν εἰδώλων

αἵμασι, τοῖς οἰκείοις αἵμασιν ἐκκαθάρωσι.

John Chrysostom, In Sanctam Martyrem

Ignatium 4, in PG 50:593.

105. τοῦ Πέτρου καὶ τοῦ Παύλου ἐν Ῥώμη

εὐαγγελιζομένων, καὶ θεμελιούντων τὴν

᾽εκκλησίαν. μετὰ δὲ τὴν τούτων ἔξοδον,

Μάρκος ὁ μαθητὴς καὶ ἑρμηνευτὴς Πέτρου,

καὶ αὐτὸς τὰ ὑπὸ Πέτρου κηρυσσόμενα

ἐγγράφως ἡμῖν παραδέδωκε. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 3.1.1, in PG 7:845.

106. “Denn … [ich] müßte sagen, daß für mich der römische Aufenthalt des Petrus zu den

Tatsachen gehört, ohne die ich mir den

Verlauf der Geschichte der Alten Kirche nicht denken kann. Aber, beweisen kann ich das

nicht und kann es niemand.” Gustav Krüger,

“Petrus in Rom,” Zeitschrift für die

neutestamentliche Wissenschaft und die

Kunde der älteren Kirche 31 (1932): 301.

107. “Kleine, menschlich unscheinbare, aber gottbegeisterte Missionare ihres Messias …

um mit «Klemens» zu reden.” Krüger,

“Petrus in Rom,” 305.

108. “[Er] hat … keinen nachweisbaren Einfluß geübt.” Gustav Krüger, Das Papsttum: Seine Idee und ihre Träger, Religionsgeschichtliche Volksbücher für die deutsche christliche

Gegenwart 4.3–4 (Tübingen: Mohr, 1907), 5.

109. “Fast alles an der Petrusüberlieferung [ist]

Legende.” Krüger, “Petrus in Rom,” 301.

110. “Par une phrase assez creuse de Clément Romain.” Goguel, Jésus et les Origines du

Christianisme, 231.

111. Duchesne, Origines du culte chrétien, 15.

112. Jacques Zeiller, “A Propos de l’Intervention de l’Église de Rome à Corinthe,” Revue

d’Histoire Ecclésiastique 31 (1935): 762.

113. ἡ ἐκκλησία τοῦ θεοῦ ἡ παροικοῦσα Ῥώμην

τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ τῇ παροικούσῃ

Κόρινθον. Clement, Epistola Primera ad

Corinthios 1:1, in PG 1:201–4.

114. See Hugh Nibley, Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1987), 293.

115. τὴν σήμερον οὖν κυριακὴν ἁγίαν ἡμέραν

διηγάγομεν, ἐν ᾗ ἀνέγνωμεν ὑμῶν τὴν

ἐπιστολήν ; τὴν προτέραν ἡμῖν διὰ

Κλήμεντος γραφεῖσαν. Eusebius, Historia

Ecclesiastica 4.23.11, in PG 20:388.

116. Κατ᾽ Ἀντιόχειαν Πέτρου διαδοχῆς δεύτερος

τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν κεκληρομένος. Eusebius,

Historia Ecclesiastica 3.36.2, in PG 20:288.

117. πρὸς ταύταις καὶ τῇ ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίᾳ

γράφει. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 3.36.6, in PG 20:288.

118. “Or, n’y a-t-il pas tout â parier que les

relations des deux communautés entre elles sont de même nature que les relations qui

unissaient les deux villes?” R. Van

Cauwelaert, “L’Intervention de l’Église de

Rome a Corinthe vers l’An 96,” Revue

d’Histoire Ecclésiastique 31 (1935): 283.

119. “Les chrétiens de Rome et de Corinthe ont dû conserver leurs précédentes relations

sociales, leur esprit civique, leur sentiment national, et même la fierté de leurs cités… .

Nous pouvons tenir pour assuré que … les

rapports profanes durent leur fournir

l’occasion désirée de rapports religieux.” Van Cauwelaert, “L’Intervention de l’Église de

Rome,” 283.

120. “Le culte [à Corinthe] y était, dans son ensemble, plus romain, parce que moins

cosmopolite, qu’à Rome même.” Van

Cauwelaert, “L’Intervention de l’Église de

Rome,” 293.

121. “Dans sa vie officielle, tant politique que religieuse, Corinthe se présente donc, au 1er siècle, comme une ville entièrement et

exclusivement romaine, avec une note non

équivoque de romanisme puritain.” Van Cauwelaert, “L’Intervention de l’Église de

Rome,” 293.

122. “Seule [pour] l’influence persistante, l’intervention continuelle de Rome, et une

extrême docilité, un véritable esprit de

courtisan de la part de Corinthe.” Van

Cauwelaert, “L’Intervention de l’Église de

Rome,” 302.

123. “Pourquoi les chrétiens, conscients de ne former qu’un seul corps, seraient-ils restés ici sans rapports? Arguant a pari des relations profanes de Corinthe avec Rome, nous

pouvons admettre que les chrétiens des deux

villes n’étaient pas moins unis entre eux que leurs concitoyens païens.” Van Cauwelaert,

“L’Intervention de l’Église de Rome,” 304.

124. “Leur a tenu le langage, non d’un frére du dehors mais d’un membre reconnu de la

famille chrétienne de Corinthe.” Van

Cauwelaert, “L’Intervention de l’Église de

Rome,” 305.

125. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 7.36, in PG 67:820–21.

126. “Par conséquent, la question de savoir si la 1a Clementis se présente comme un acte de la primauté romaine doit recevoir, semble-t-il, une résponse négative. Évidemment, du fait

que l’église de Rome ne s’y prévaut pas de

droits spéciaux, on ne serait pas autorisé à conclure qu’elle n’avait pas conscience de sa primauté.” Van Cauwelaert, “L’Intervention

de l’Église de Rome,” 305–6.

127. “Il faudra souligner que le style modeste du document est en parfaite harmonie avec le

principe qu’elle énonce elle-même à l’usage

de ceux qui ont la mission d’instruire les

autres.” Van Cauwelaert, “L’Intervention de

l’Église de Rome,” 306.

128. τοσούτῳ γὰρ μᾶλλον ταπεινοφρονεῖν

ὀφείλει, ὃσῳ δοκεῖ μᾶλλον μείζων εἶναι, καὶ

ζητεῖν τὸ κοινωφελὲς πᾶσιν καὶ μὴ τὸ ἑαυτοῦ.

Clement, Epistola Primera ad Corinthios

48.6, in PG 1:309.

129. Heinrich Vogels, Textus Antenicaeni ad Primatum Romanum Spectantes, Florilegium Patristicum tam Veteris quam Medii Aevi

Auctores Complectens 9, ed. Bernhard Geyer

and Johannes Zellinger (Bonn: Hanstein, 1937).

130. Source unidentified.

131. “[L’Église naissante] était … une société hiérarchisée, une église d’églises, une unité gardée par l’unité de la cathedra Petri, elle était consciente d’être tout cela.” Batiffol, L’Église naissante et le Catholicisme, xii.

132. [Apostolicam sedem] apostolic hoc statuerunt … ut majores et difficiliores quaestiones semper ad sedem deferantur

apostolicam. Anacletus, Epistola 1.4, in PG

2:800.

133. Ad sedem apostolicam referre maluit, quasi ad caput, quid deberet de rebus dubiis

custodire, potius quam usurpatione

praesumerit. Evaristus, Epistola 1, in PG

5:1047.

134. Si autem adversus [vestrum episcopum]

aliquam querelam habueritis … inquirendum erit, et auctoritate hujus sanctae sedis terminandum. Evaristus, Epistola 2, in PG

5:1052.

135. Source unidentified.

136. “La chrétienté est née catholique.” Batiffol, L’Église naissante et le Catholicisme, xi.

137. “Les premiers temps passés, une fois disparu tout ce personnel itinerant, ubiquiste, il ne resta plus que les organizations

ecclésiastiques locales.” Duchesne, Origines du culte chrétien, 14.

138. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 5.22, in PG 67:640.

139. “C’est à la grande Babylone de l’Occident, tant maudite des prophètes juifs, que ce role était échu.” Duchesne, Origines du culte chrétien, 14.

140. Duchesne, Origines du culte chrétien, 8–

11.

141. Karl Holl, “Der Kirchenbegriff des Paulus in seinem Verhältnis zu dem der Urgemeinde,”

in Holl, Gesammelte Aufsätze zur

Kirchengeschichte (Tübingen: Mohr, 1928), 2:44–67.

142. ; ἀγαπῶν ὑμᾶς. Ignatius, Epistola ad Trallianos 3, in PG 1:780.

143. τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ, τῇ παροικούσῃ ἐν

Φιλομηλίῳ καὶ πάσαις ταῖς κατὰ πάντα τόπον

τῆς ; ἐκκλησίας παροικίαις. Martyrdom of Polycarp 1, in PG 5:1029.

144. Anacletus, Epistola 1.4, in PG 2:800.

145. ἐπειδὴ γὰρ τοῦ τυράννου τελευτήσαντος

ἀπὸ τῆς Πάτμου τῆς νήσου μετῆλθεν ἐπὶ τὴν

Ἔφεσον, ἀπῄει παρακαλούμενος καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ

πλησιόχωρα τῶν ἐθνῶν, ὅπου μὲν

ἐπισκόπους καταστήσων, ὅπου δὲ ὅλας

ἐκκλησίας ἁρμόσων, ὅπου δὲ κλῆρον ἕνα γέ

τινα κληρώσων τῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ πνεύματος

σημαινομένων. Eusebius, Historia

Ecclesiastica 3.23.6, in PG 20:257.

146. ταῦτα τὰ δόγματα οἱ πρὸ ἡμῶν

πρεσβύτεροι, οἱ καὶ τοῖς ἀποστόλοις

συμφοιτήσαντες, οὐ παρέδωκαν σοι.

Irenaeus, fragment 2, in PG 7:1228.

147. τουτέστιν, ἐπίσκοπον πρὸς ἐπίσκοπον

κρινῶ, καὶ λαῒκὸν πρὸς λαῒκόν, καὶ ἄρχοντα

πρὸς ἄρχοντα. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.19.1, in PG 1:633.

148. λογικὰ γάρ τὰ πρόβατα; . διὸ φευκτέον απὸ

τῶν φθορέων ποιμένον. Constitutiones

Apostolicae 2.19.3, in PG 1:633.

149. See n. 147.

150. The following are the earliest bishops of Rome with their self-proclaimed titles: Linus, Anacletus ( episcopus, Epistola 2.1, in PG

5:801), Clement, Evaristus ( episcopus,

Epistola 2, in PG 5:1051); Alexander ( episcopus, Epistola 1, in PG 5:1057; Epistola 2, in PG 5:1069); Sixtus I ( archepiscopus, Epistola 1, in PG 5:1073; episcopus, Epistola 2, in PG 5:1077); Telesphorus ( archepiscopus, Epistola ad Omnes Universaliter Christi Fideles, in PG

5:1081); Hyginius ( episcopus, Epistola 1, in PG 5:1087; papa, Epistola 2, in PG 5:1091); Pius I ( archepiscopus, Epistola 1, in PG

5:1119; Epistola 2, in PG 5:1122); Soter ( archepiscopus, Epistola 1, in PG 5:1133; papa, Epistola 2, in PG 5:1136); Eleutherius ( episcopus, Epistola 1, in PG 5:1139).

151. J.-P. Migne, note 15 on Sixtus I, Epistola 2, PG 5:1077.

152. γνώριζε σεαυτόν. Constitutiones Apostolicae 2.18.3, in PG 1:629.

153. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Contendings of the Apostles (London: Oxford University Press,

1935), 421.

154. Source unidentified.

155. ὡς δ᾽ ὁ ἱερὸς τῶν ᾽αποστόλων χορὸς

διάφορον εἰλήφει τοῦ βίου τέλος,

παρεληλύθει τε ἡ γενεὰ ἐκείνη τῶν αὐταῖς

ἀκοαῖς τῆς ἐνθέου σοφίας ἐπακοῦσαι

κατηξιωμένην, τηνικαῦτα τῆς ἀθέου πλάνης

τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐλάμβανεν ἡ σύστασις, διὰ τῆς τῶν

ἑτεροδιδασκάλων ἀπάτης· οἳ καὶ ἅτε μηδενὸς

ἔτι τῶν ἀποστόλων λειπομένου, γυμνῇ

λοιπὸν ἤδη τῇ κεφαλῇ, τῷ τῆς ἀληθειας

κηρύγματι τὴν ψευδώνυμον γνῶσιν

ἀντικηρύττειν ἐπεχείρουν. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 3.32.8, in PG 20:284.

156. Athanasius, Doctrina ad Antiocham Ducem, question 43, in PG 28:625.

157. Acta Sancti Justini et sociorum 4

(Recension B), in PG 6:1565–72.

158. αὐτίκα γοῦν ὥσπερ ἐξ ἑνὸς φύντες πατρὸς, ἑνός τε θεοῦ οἷα παῖδες, καὶ μητρὸς μιᾶς τῆς

ἀληθοῦς εὐσεβείας. Eusebius, De Laudibus Constantini Oratio 16.7, in PG 20:142.

159. διαφερομένων τινῶν πρὸς ἀλλήλους κατὰ

διφόρους χώρας, οἷά τις κοινὸς ἐπίσκοπος ἐκ

θεοῦ καθεσταμένος, συνόδους τῶν τοῦ θεοῦ

λειτουργῶν συνεκρότει. ἐν μέσῃ δὲ τῇ

τούτων διατριβῇ οὐκ ἀπαξιῶν παρεῖναί τε καὶ

συνιζάνειν, κοινωνὸς τῶν ἐπισκοπουμένῶν

ἐγίνετο, τὰ τῆς εἰρήνης τοῦ θεοῦ βραβεύων

τοῖς πᾶσῖ καθῆστό τε καὶ μέσος. ὡσεὶ καὶ

τῶν πολλῶν εἷς. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 1.44, in PG 20:957–60.

160. μοι ; ἄγαν εὐτελὴς καὶ οὐδαμῶς ἀξία τῆς

τοσαύτης φιλονεικίας ἡ πρόφασις ἐφωράθη.

διόπερ ἐπὶ τὴν τῆς ἐπιστολῆς ταύτης ἀνάγκην

ἐπειχθείς, καὶ πρὸς τὴν ὁμόψυχον ὑμῶν

ἀγχίνοιαι γράφων ; οἷον εἰρήνης πρύτανιν

ἐμαυτὸν προσάγω εἰκότως. Eusebius, Vita

Constantini 2.68, in PG 20:1040–41.

161. ταύτην ἐγὼ τὴν νόσον κατασεῖλαι

βουληθείς, οὐδεμίαν ἑτέραν ἄρκουσαν τῷ

πράγματι θεραπείαν εὕρισκον ἐξελών ;

ἐνίους ὑμῶν πρὸς τὴν τῶν πρὸς ἀλλήλους

διχονοούντων ὁμόνοιαν βοηθοὺς

ἀποστείλαιμι. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 2.66, in PG 20:1037–40.

162. τῇς δέ γε βασιλευούσης πόλεως ὁ μὲν

προεστὼς ὑστέρει διὰ γῆρας. Eusebius, Vita

Constantini 3.7, in PG 20:1061.

163. τοιοῦτον μόνον ἐξ αἰῶνος, εἷς βασιλεὺς

Κωνσταντῖνος Χριστῷ στέφανον δεσμῷ,

συνάψας εἰρήνης, τῷ αὐτοῦ Σωτῆρι τῆς κατ᾽

ἐχθρῶν καὶ πολεμίων νίκης θεοπρεπὲς

ἀνετίθη χαριστήριον, εἰκόνα χορείας

ἀπολτολικῆς ταύτην καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς

συστησάμενος. Socrates Scholasticus,

Historia Ecclesiastica 1.8, in PG 67:61.

164. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 5.22, in PG 67:640.

165. ἄλλως γὰρ οὐ δυνατὸν τὰ μεγάλα τῶν

σκεμμάτῶν, ἤ διὰ συνόδων. Eusebius, Vita Constantini 1.51, in PG 20:965.

166. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 2.23, in PG 67:252–57.

167. Dilectissimis et beatissimis Fratribus et coepiscopis provinciae Germaniae primae, et Germania secundae, et primae Belgicae, et Belgicae secundae, et Lugdunensi primae, et Ludgunensi secundae, et provinciae

Aquitanicae, et provinciae Novempopulanae, et ex Narbonensi plebibus et clericis

Tolosanis, et provinciarum Britanniarum

episcopis, Hilarius servus Christi, in Deo et Domino nostro aeternam salutem. Hilary, De Synodis 1, in PL 10:479.

168. Tamen etiam in eo ferventis spiritus ardorem probates, quod nonnulli ex vobis, quorum ad me potuerunt scripta deferri,

quae exinde Orientales in fidei

professionibus gerant et gesserunt,

significari vobis humilitatis meae litteris desiderastis: etiam hoc mihi onus

imperitissimo atque indoctissimo omnium ex affectu charitatis addentes, ut quid ipse super omnibus dictis eorum sentiam

indecim. Hilary, De Synodis 5, in PL 10:483–

84.

169. ὅτι γὰρ καὶ φόνων τὰς ἐκκλησίας

ἐνέπλησάν τινες, καὶ πόλεις ἀναστάτους

ἐποίησαν ὑπὲρ ταύτης μαχόμενοι τῆς ἀρχῆς.

John Chrysostom, De Sacerdotio 3.10, in PG

48:647.

170. 1 Clement 44.2.

171. παρ᾽ οὐδὲν δὲ τὴν τῶν ἀποστόλων

νομοθεσίαν τιθέμενοι. Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 5.22, in PG 67:641–

44.

172. ἀλλ᾽ ἐπισκήπτω ὑμῖν πρὸς τῶν πατέρων, πρὸς τῆς ὀρθῆς πίστεως. … Basil, Epistola 28.3, in PG 32:309.

173. ὅσον τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν τὰ ἀῤῥωστήματα ἐπὶ

τὸ μεῖζον πρόεισι, τοσοῦτον πάντες ἐπὶ τὴν

σὴν ἐπιστρεφόμεθα τελειότητα ;

διασώσασθαι ἡμᾶς ἐκ τοῦ φοβεροῦ τούτου

χειμώνος. Basil, Epistola 80.1, in PG 32:456.

174. Basil, Epistola 54, in PG 32:400–401.

175. Cyril, Catechesis 16.9, in PG 33:929.

176. In ecclesia tempora tria, Christi, apostolorum et illud quod in sequentes

aetates excurit. Cyril, in PG 33:1666; see also PG 33:930 n. 6.

177. Ἰακώβῳ τῷ Δικαίῳ καὶ Ἰωάννῃ καὶ Πέτρῳ

μετὰ τὴν ἀνάστασιν παρέδωκε τὴν γνῶσιν ὁ

Κύριος. οὗτοι τοῖς λοιποῖς ἀποστόλος

παρέδωκαν. οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ ἀποστόλοι τοῖς

ἑβδομήκοντα. Eusebius, Historia

Ecclesiastica 2.1.4, in PG 20:136.

178. 1 Clement 42.1.

179. 1 Clement 42.4, 44.2.

180. κἂν ποτε ἐπιδημῇς ἐν πόλεσι, μὴ ἁπλῶς

ἐξέταζε, ποῦ τὸ κυριακοῦ ἐστι (καὶ γὰρ αἱ

λοιποὶ τῶν ἀσεβῶν αἱρέσεις κυριακὰ τὰ

ἑαυτῶν σπήλαια καλεῖν ἐπιχειροῦσι)· μηδὲ,

ποῦ ἔστιν ἁπλῶς ἡ ἐκκλησίᾶ ἀλλά, ποῦ ἔστιν

ἡ καθολικὴ ἐκκλησία. τοῦτο γὰρ ἰδικὸν

ὄνομα τυγχάνει τῆς ἁγίας ταύτης, καὶ μητρὸς

ἡμῶν ἁπάντων. Cyril, Catechesis 18.26, in PG 33:1048.

181. καθολικὴ μὲν οὖν καλεῖται, διὰ τὸ κατὰ

πάσης εἶναι τῆς οἰκουμένης ; καὶ διὰ τὸ

διδάσκειν καθολικῶς καὶ ἀνελλειπῶς ἅπαντα

τὰ εἰς γνῶσιν ἀνθρώπων ἐλθεῖν ὀφείλοντα

δόγματα ; καὶ διὰ τὸ πᾶν γένος ἀνθρώπων εἶς

εὐσέβεια ὑποτάσσειν ; καὶ διὰ τὸ καθολικῶς

ἰατρύειν μὲν καὶ θεραπεύειν ἅπαν τὸ τῶν

ἁμαρτιῶν εἶδος ; κεκτῆσθαι δὲ ἐν αὐτῇ πᾶσαν

ἰδέαν ὀνομαζομένης ἀρετῆς. Cyril, Catechesis 18.23, in PG 33:1044.

182. Pater tuus … vir maturioris aevi, dicebat: Non est meum judicare inter episcopos; tua nunc dicit clementia: Ego debeo judicare.

Ambrose, Epistola 21.5, in PL 16:1046.

183. [Populi] aiunt: … vult Ambrosius posse, quam imperator. Ambrose, Epistola 21.30, in

PL 16:1059.

184. Siricius, hodie qui noster est socius: cum quo nobiscum totus orbis commercio

formatarum, in una communionis societate concordat. Optatus, De Schismate Donatistorum 2.3, in PL 11:949.

185. Optatus, De Schismate Donatistorum 5.3.1, in PL 11:1048.

186. … ergo in terris de hac re nullum poterit reperiri judicium; de coelo quaerendus est judex. Optatus, De Schismate Donatistorum 5.3, in PL 11:1048.

187. Quamdiu pater praesens est, ipse imperat singulis; non est adhuc necessarium

testamentum: sic et Christus … pro tempore quidquid necessarium erat Apostolis

imperavit … vivus, cuius est testamentum, in coelo est: ergo voluntas ejus, velut in

testamento, sic in Evangelio requiratur.

Optatus, De Schismate Donatistorum 5.3, in PL 11:1049–50.

188. Innocent I, Epistola, in PL 20:551–52; Duchesne, Origines du culte chrétien, 89–91.

189. “[Diese] zwingen das Papsttum gewaltsam

in die Bahn universaler Kirchenführung zurück.” Gerhart Ladner, “Das Heilige Reich

des Mittelalterlichen Westens,” Die Welt als Geschichte: Eine Zeitschrift für

Universalgeschichte 11 (1951): 146.

190. Istis ergo temporibus Hermes doctor fidei et scripturarum effulsit inter nos. Et …

eidem Hermae angelus Domini in habitu

pastoris apparuit, et praecepit ei, ut Pascha die Dominico ab omnibus celebraretur. Unde et vos apostolica auctoritate instruimus. Pius I, Epistola 1.1, in PG 5:1120.

191. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 5.24, in PG 20:493–508.

192. Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 5.24, in PG 20:493–508.

193. Origen, Peri Archón introduction, in PG

11:111–14.

194. Origen, Peri Archón 1.2, in PG 11:115–16.

195. In hoc non jam manifeste discernitur, utrum natus an innatus… . Sed inquirenda jam ista pro viribus sunt de sacra scriptura, et sagaci perquistition investiganda. Origen, Peri Archón 1.4, in PG 11:117–18.

196. [Diabolus et angeli ejus] sunt … [sed]

quae autem sint, aut quomodo sint, non satis clare exposuit. Origen, Peri Archón 1.6, in PG 11:119.

197. … quod mundus iste factus sit… . Quid tamen ante hunc mundum fuerit, aut quid

post mundum erit … non … evidens … in

ecclesiastica praedicatione. Origen, Peri Archón 1.7, in PG 11:119.

198. … non satis in manifesto designatur.

Origen, Peri Archón 1.10, in PG 11:120–21.

199. Origen, Peri Archón 1.9, in PG 11:120; Contra Celsum 7.27, in PG 11:1460.

200. Ecclesiastica praedicatio per successionis ordinem ab apostolis tradita, et usque ad praesens in ecclesiis permanens. Origen, Peri Archón 1.2, in PG 11:116.

201. … in praedicatione nostra manifeste non designatur. Origen, Peri Archón 1.10, in PG

11:120.

202. περί τε Ἰουδαίων τῦν χυδαίων, περί τε τῶν

αἱρέσεων μυστικῶς διακρινομένων, ὡς

ἀκαθάρτων ἀπὸ τῆς περὶ καθαρῶν καὶ

ἀκαθάρτων ζώων θείας ἐκκλησίας. Clement

of Alexandria, Stromata 7.18, in PG 9:553.

203. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata 7.15, in PG 9:524–28.

204. Unusquisque legentium … judicet. Origen, Peri Archón 2.7, in PG 11:197.

205. Sola igitur catholica Ecclesia est, quae verum cultum retinet… . Sed tamen quia

singuli quique coetus haereticorum se

potissimum Christianos, et suam esse

Catholicam Ecclesiam putant, sciendum est illam esse veram, in qua est confessio et poenitentia, quae peccata et vulnera, quibus subjecta est imbecillitas carnis, salubriter curat. Lactantius, Divinarum Institutionum 4.30, in PL 6:542–44. Cyril had advised those of his group to use the word catholic since all the sects were calling themselves Christians, but now that is no longer a touchstone since all the sects now call themselves catholic!

Cyril, Catechesis 18.26, in PG 33:1048.

206. Dionysius of Alexandria, De promissionibus as preserved in Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 7.24.4–8.

207. ποίῳ δὲ τρόπῳ πείσομεν τὸν ἰδιώτην καὶ

βάρβαρον, ὅτι ὑπὲρ πάσας τὰς αἱρέσεις ἡ

καθολικὴ ἐκκλησία τὴν ὀρθὴν πίστιν ἔχει,

καὶ οὐ σφάλλεται. Athanasius, Doctrina ad Antiocham Ducem, question 44, in PG

28:625.

208. Athanasius, Doctrina ad Antiocham Ducem, question 44, in PG 28:625.

209. Source unidentified.

210. Necessarium mihi ac religiosum intellexi, at nunc quasi episcopus episcopis mecum in Christo communicantibus salutaris ac fidelis sermonis colloquia transmitterem. Hilary, De Synodis 2, in PL 10:481.

211. Hilary, De Synodis 5, in PL 10:483.

212. Hilary, De Synodis, in PL 10:479–546.

213. Constitutum mecum habebam, Fratres carissimi, in tanto silentii vestri tempore nullas ad vos ecclesiastici sermonis litteras mittere. Nam cum frequenter vobis ex

plurimis Romanarum provinciarum urbibus

significassem, quid cum religiosis fratribus nostris Orientis episcopis fidei studiique esset … ; verens ne in tanto ac tam plurium episcoporum calamitosae impietatis vel

erroris periculo, taciturnitas vestra de pollutae atque impiatae conscientiae esset desperatione suscepta (nam ignorare vobis frequenter admonitis non licebat). Hilary, De Synodis 1, in PL 10:480.

214. ; περὶ τοῦ κατὰ αἱρέσεων πασῶν γράψαῖ οὐ

μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ πολλῶν προτρεψαμένων, καὶ,

ὡς εἰπεῖν, ἀναγκασάντων αὐτὸν εἰς τοῦτο

ἥκειν. Acacius et Paulus, Epistola ad

Epiphanium, in PG 41:156.

215. “Der alternde Bischof Augustin ist für die lateinische Welt die Autorität geworden—alle Kirchen und Theologen des Abendlandes

wenden sich an ihn um Auskunft und Rat.

Doch diese eine Frage nach Freiheit und

Gnade ist in der letzten Epoche seines Lebens für ihn selbst schlechterdings die

entscheidende Frage geworden.” Hans von

Campenhausen, “Augustin als Kind und

Überwinder seiner Zeit,” Die Welt als

Geschichte: Eine Zeitschrift für

Universalgeschichte 13 (1953): 9.

216. Justin Martyr, Cohortatio ad Graecos 8, in PG 6:256–57.

217. Von Campenhausen, “Augustin als Kind und Überwinder seiner Zeit,” 9.

218. Augustine, Epistola 78.3, in PL 33:268–69.

219. Scio de hac quaestione ab eruditissimis viris variae disputatum, et unumquemque pro captu ingenii sui dixisse quod senserat. Quia igitur periculosum est de magistrorum

Ecclesiae judicare sententiis, et alterum praeferre alteri, dicam unusquisque senserit, lectoris abritrio derelinquens, cuius

expositionem sequi debent. Jerome,

Commentariorum in Danielam Liber 9, in PL

25:542.

220. ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἔγνωσαν οἱ ἀπόστολοι ταραχὴν ἐκ

τῆς διαφωνίας τῶν ἐθνῶν κινουμένην τοῖς

πιστεύουσι, πάντες ἅμα γενόμενοι θεῖον

νόμον ἐθέσπισαν; . ἀντιστρέψαντες μὲν τὰ

τοῦ θεοῦ παραγγέλματα ; παρ᾽ οὐδὲν δὲ τὴν

τῶν ἀποστόλων νομοθεσίαν τιθέμενοι.

Socrates Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 5.22, in PG 67:641–44.

221. PL 72:703–60.

222. “Il semblait … que nous n’avions aucune chance de posséder un tombeau ou des

reliques authentiques de Pierre. Les fouilles du Vatican … pourraient bien avoir établi qu’il n’y a ni tombeau ni reliques, authentiques ou non.” Paul Lemerle, “Les fouilles de Saint-Pierre de Rome,” La Nouvelle Clio 2 (1950): 411.

223. See Nibley, Mormonism and Early Christianity, 293.

224. “Im zweiten Jahrhundert hat kein Kirchenvater oder Häretiker auf diesen Vers

angespielt, auch dort nicht, wo man nach dem Context eine Anspielung erwartet. Erst

Tertullian und der Verfasser der

clementinischen Homilien bezeugen ihn.”

Adolf von Harnack, “Die Acta Archelai und

das Diatessaron Tatians,” Texte und

Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der

altchristlichen Literatur 1/3 (1883): 150.

225. θεμέλιος. Clement, Epistola ad Jacobum 1, in PG 2:33.

226. Sed Dei filium coelestis patris revelatione conspiciens… . O in nuncupatione novi

nominis felix Ecclesiae fundamentum. Hilary, In Evangelium Matthaei Commentarius 16.7,

in PL 9:1009–10.

227. Haec fides, Ecclesiae fundamentum est: per hanc fidem infirmes adversus eam sunt portae inferorum. Haec fides regni coelestis havet claves. Haec fides quae in terris

solverit aut ligaverit, et ligata in coelis sunt et soluta. Haec fides paternae revelationis est munus… . Haec revelatio Patris est …

haec securitas aeternitatis est. Hilary, De Trinitate 6.37, in PL 10:187–88.

228. αὕτη γὰρ ἀληθῶς τῆς εὐσεβείας ἡ πέτρα.

Basilius Seleuciensis, Oratio 25.4, in PG

85:297.

229. “Auch ich sage dir, ja dir, Petrus (sage ich es, weil du als erster meine Messiaswürde und meine Gottessohnschaft bekannt hast): Auf

diesem Felsen (auf der Tatsache meiner

Messiaswürde und meiner Gottessohnschaft)

will ich meine Gemeinde bauen.” Hermann L.

Strack and Paul Billerbeck, Kommentar zum neuen Testament aus Talmud und Midrash

(Munich: Beck, 1922), 1:732.

230. “Diese Deutung empfiehle sich auch deshalb, weil sonst in der alten Kirche immer

Christus und nicht Petrus das Fundament der Kirche ist.” Olof Linton, Das Problem der Urkirche in der neueren Forschung: Eine

kritische Darstellung (Uppsala: Almquist and Wiksells, 1932), 170.

231. “Le Tu es Petrus ne contient aucune des théories ecclésiastiques qu’on y a

successivement découvertes. Il ne justifie

l’autorité ni des évêques en général, ni de

celui de Rome en particulier. Il exprime

seulement le fait que l’Église repose sur la foi à la résurrection de Jésus et que c’est Pierre qui, dans sa christophanie, a eu le premier la révélation de la résurrection, révélation sans laquelle la foi en Jésus n’aurait pas survécu à la passion.” Goguel, Jésus et les Origines du Christianisme, 203.

232. “D’un côte, Pierre confesse la grandeur du Christ. De l’autre, Jésus proclame la grandeur future de Pierre. Il y a là, comme dans un

diptyque, un parallélisme intentionnel qui ne permet pas d’isoler nos trios versets.” G.

Jacquemet, Tu es Petrus (Paris: Bloud et Gay, 1934), 5.

233. “Certes, il n’existe avant Tertullien ( Pud.

22) aucune citation textuelle de la partie

centrale du verset 18. Mais c’est le cas d’un très grand nombre de versets du Nouveau

Testament.” Jacquemet, Tu es Petrus, 8; Tertullian, De Pudicitia 21, in PL 2:1025.

234. Adolf von Harnack, “Der Spruch über Petrus als den Felsen der Kirche (Matth. 16, 17f),” Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin (1918): 652–53.

235. “Comment ces deux evangelists, surtout Marc, «l’interprète de Pierre», ont-ils pu

ignorer ou négliger et la belle profession de foi faite par l’apôtre: «Tu es le Christ, le Fils du Dieu vivant» et la magnifique promesse du

Sauveur: «Tu es Pierre»?” Jacquemet, Tu es Petrus, 10.

236. “Par humilité, aurait omis tout ce qui était à sa louange.” Jacquemet, Tu es Petrus, 11.

237. “Marc n’insiste pas sur l’orginisation de l’Église… . Estimer que Marc aurait dû

detailer les origins historiques de l’Église …

c’est une prétention dénuée pour le moins de

sens critique.” Jacquemet, Tu es Petrus, 11.

238. “Le point important est du reste de determiner qui peut en fait convoquer des conciles œcuméniques ou qui peut coopérer à leur convocation? et voici la response: Les

huit premiers conciles œcuméniques furent

convoqués et promulgués par les empereurs, ceux qui suivirent le furent par les papes. Ces derniers participèrent cependant dans une

certaine mesure à la convocation des premiers conciles œcuméniques et dans certains cas

particuliers leur cooperation s’est manifestée d’une manière plus ou moins visible.” Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:13, emphasis in original.

239. “1º s’il s’est produit une hérésie grave ou un schisme; 2º si deux papes étant en presence

on ne peut discerner quell est le veritable; 3º

s’il s’agit de décréter une enterprise

universelle contre les ennemis du nom

chrétien; 4º si le pape est soupçonné d’hérésie ou d’autres manquements plus graves; 5º si

les cardinaux ne peuvent ou ne veulent

procéder à l’élection d’un pape, et enfin 6º s’il

s’agit d’une réforme de l’Église dans la personne de son chef ou de ses members.”

Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:13.

240. “La recherché du bien de l’Église par une délibération commune de ses pasteurs.”

Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:9.

241. Hefele, Histoire des Conciles d’Après les Documents Originaux, 1:4.

242. Σύνοδος θεία καὶ ἱερὰ τοπικὴ ἐν Ῥώμῃ

συναθροισθεῖσα ἀπὸ τοῦ μακαριωτάτου

Ἀνικήτου, τοῦ ταύτης πάπα, καὶ Πολυκάρπου

ἱερομάρτυρος ἐπισκόπου Σμύρνης; Synodus

divina et sancta provincialis, Romae

congregata a beatissimo Aniceto, ejusdem urbis papa, et Polycarpo sancto martyre

Smyrnae episcopo, aliisque episcopis decem.

Joannes Dominicus Mansi, Sacrorum

Conciliorum Nova et Amplissima Collectio (Graz: Akademische Druck- und

Verlagsanstalt, 1960), 1:686.

243. Mansi, Sacrorum Conciliorum Nova et Amplissima Collectio, 1:705–8.

244. οὕτως εἰ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν συνόδων οἱ

Πατέρες διαφόρως ἐμνημόνευσαν περὶ τοῦ

ὁμοουσίου, οὐ χρὴ πάντες ἡμᾶς διαφέρεσθαι

πρὸς αὐτοὺς, ἀλλὰ ; πάντως εὐρήσομεν

ἀμφοτέρων τῶν συνόδων τὴν ὁμόνοιαν.

Athanasius, De Synodis 45, in PG 26:772.

245. Frederick M. Powicke, The Christian Life in the Middle Ages and Other Essays

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1935), 28.

246. Didache 11.11.

247. Heinrich Vogels, Textus Antenicaeni ad Primatum Romanum Spectantes, Florilegium Patristicum tam Veteris quam Medii Aevi

Auctores Complectens 9, ed. Bernhard Geyer

and Johannes Zellinger (Bonn: Hanstein,

1937).

248. Batiffol, Cathedra Petri, 215–48.

249. Denzinger, Enchiridion Symbolorum, items 466, 570d, 766.

250. καὶ οἱ ἀπόστολοι ; ἔγνωσαν ; ὅτι ἔρις ἔσται

ἐπὶ τοῦ ὀνόματος τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς. Clement,

Epistola Primera ad Corinthios 44.1, in PG

1:296–97.

251. τοὺς οὖν κατασταθέντας ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνων ἢ

μεταξὺ ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρων ἐλλογίμων ἀνδρῶν, συνευδοκησάσης τῆς πάσης ;

μεμαρτυρημένους τε πολλοῖς χρόνοις ὑπὸ

πάντων, τούτους οὐ δικαίως νομίζομεν

ἀποβάλλεσθαι τῆς λειτουργίας. Clement,

Epistola Primera ad Corinthios 44:3, in PG

1:297–300.

252. ὡς μαρτυρεῖ ἡ βίβλος τῶν Πράξεων. ἐπεὶ

γὰρ ἔγνωσαν οἱ ἀπόστολοι ταραχὴν ἐκ τῆς

διαφωνίας τῶν ἐθνῶν κινουμένην τοῖς

πιστεύουσι, πάντες ἅμα γενόμενοι θεῖον

νόμον ἐθέσπισαν, ἐν τύπῳ ἐπιστολῆς

καταγράψαντες· δι᾽ οὗ τῆς βαρυτάτης μὲν

περὶ τῶν τοιούτων δουλείας τε καὶ

ἐρεσχελίας τοὺς πιστεύοντες ἠλευθέρωσαν; .

ἀντιστρέψαντες μὲν τὰ τοῦ θεοῦ

παραγγέλματα ; παρ᾽ οὐδὲν δὲ τὴν τῶν

ἀποστόλων νομοθεσίαν τιθέμενοι. Socrates

Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 5.22, in PG 67:641–44.

253. γνῶσις ἀληθής, ἡ τῶν ἀποστόλων διδαχή, καὶ το ἀρχαῖον τῆς ἐκκλησίας σύστημα κατὰ

παντὸς τοῦ κόσμου. This is all that exists of the Greek text; the full Latin text follows:

Agnitio vera est apostolorum doctrina et antiquus Ecclesia status, in universo mundo et character corporis Christi secundum

successiones episcoporum, quibus illi eam, quae in unoquoque loco est, Ecclesiam

tradiderunt: quae pervenit usque ad nos

custoditione sine fictione Scripturarum

tractatio plenissima … quod est pretiosius quam agnitio gloriosius autem quam

prophetia, omnibus autem reliquis

charismatibus supereminentius. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 4.33.7, in PG 7:1077–78.

254. ἡ μὲν γὰρ Ἐκκλησία, καίπερ καθ᾽ ὅλης τῆς

οἰκουμένης ἕως περάτων τῆς γῆς

διεσπαρμένη, παρὰ δὲ τῶν ᾽αποστόλων, καὶ

τῶν ἐκείνων μαθητῶν παραλαβοῦσα τὴν ;

πίστιν. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 1.10.1, in PG 7:549.

255. τοῦτο τὸ κήρυγμα παρειληφυῖα ; ἡ

Ἐκκλησία, καίπερ ἐν ὅλῳ τῷ κόσμῳ

διεσπαρμένη, ἐπιμελῶς φυλάσσει, ὡς ἕνα

οἶκον οἰκοῦσᾶ καὶ ὁμοίως πιστεύει τούτοις,

ὡς μίαν ψυχὴν καὶ τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχουσα

καρδίαν, καὶ συμφώνως ταῦτα κηρύσσει, καὶ

διδάσκει ; ὡς ἓν στόμα κεκτημένη. καὶ γὰρ αἱ

κατὰ τὸν κόσμον διάλεκτοι ἀνόμοιοι, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ

δύναμις τῆς παραδόσεως μία καὶ ἡ αὐτή. καὶ

οὔτε αἱ ἐν Γερμανίαις ἱδρυμέναι Ἐκκλησία

ἄλλως πεπιστεύκασιν, ἢ ἄλλως

παραδιδόασιν, οὔτε ἐν ταῖς Ἰβηρίαις, οὔτε ἐν

Κελτοῖς, οὔτε κατὰ τὰς ἀνατολάς, οὔτε ἐν

Αἰγύπτῳ, οὔτε ἐν Λιβύῃ, οὔτε αἱ κατὰ μέσα

τοῦ κόσμου ἱδρυμέναῖ ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ ὁ ἥλιος,

τὸ κτίσμα τοῦ θεοῦ, ἐν ὅλῳ τῷ κόσμῳ εἷς καὶ

ὁ αὐτός. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 1.10.2, in PG 7:552–53.

256. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 1.10.1–2, in PG

7:549–52.

257. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 1.10.2, in PG

7:552.

258. Domusque orationis Ecclesiae est, quae in toto orbe dividitur, et non Templum

Judaeorum, quod brevissimis Judaeae terrae arctabantur angustiis. Jerome,

Commentariorum in Isaiam Prophetam Liber 15.66, in PL 24:542.

259. Optatus, De Schismate Donatistorum 2.1.4, in PL 11:942–43.

260. Ambrose, Hexameron 3.1.3, in PL 14:156

261. τοῦτο γὰρ ἦν ποτε τῆς ἐκκλησίας τὸ

καύχημα, ὅτι ἀπὸ τῶν περάτων τῆς

οἰκουμένης ἐπὶ τὰ πέρατα μικροῖς συμβόλοις

ἐφοδιαζόμενοι οἱ ἐξ ἑκαστης ἐκκλησίας

ἀδελφοι πάντας πατέρας καὶ ἀδελφοὺς

εὕρισκον· ὃ νῦν ; καὶ κατὰ πόλεις

περιγεγράμμεθα, καὶ ἕκαστος δι᾽ ὑποψίας

ἔχομεν τὸν πλησίον. Basil, Epistola 191.1, in PG 32:704.

262. ἐπειδὴ δὲ εἷς λαὸς πάντες οἱ εἰς Χριστὸν

ἠλπικότες, καὶ μία ἐκκλησία νῦν οἱ Χριστοῦ,

κἂν ἐκ διαφόρων τόπων προσαγορεύηται,

χαίρει καὶ ἡ πατρὶς καὶ εὐφραίνεται ταῖς τοῦ

Κυρίου οἰκονομίαις, καὶ οὐχ ἡγεῖται ἕνα

ἄνδρα ἐξημιῶσθαι, ἀλλὰ δι᾽ ἑνὸς ἐκκλησίας

ὅλας προσειληφέναι. Basil, Epistola 161.1, in PG 32:629.

263. ὁ ἄγγελος ὁ τῆς ἐκκλησίας. Basil, Epistola 239.1, in PG 32:889.

264. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses 1.10.2, in PG

7:552–53.

265. Epiphanius, De Fide 18.3, in PG 42:820b.

Editors’ Postscript

How Professor Nibley ended these

lectures remains unknown. If he finished this course in his typical style, he offered no

overall summation. He simply left these

pieces of information on the table and let his students make whatever they could or would

of them. He always remained open to further

examination of old readings and the

introduction of new data, and he welcomed

criticisms. So, when the final class period

came to an end, Nibley probably continued

talking as the bell rang and as he walked out of the lecture hall, all the way across

campus, and right back into the library.

How Nibley would have concluded these

investigations one may infer quite certainly, however, by placing this exposition in the

context of Nibley’s larger concerns and

broader views concerning the changes and

losses that occurred during the early

Christian centuries. Those views are most

specifically presented in two publications,

one in 1955 and the other in 1961, statements from which comprise a suitable postscript

for these 1954 lectures.

In 1955, when the topic of these lectures

was surely still on Nibley’s mind, he

published a multi-installment series in the

Improvement Era entitled “The Way of the Church.” His overall purpose in that series

was to explain why the surviving records of

the early Christian fathers do not give

straightforward support to the idea of a great apostasy, with the obvious reason being that those who wrote and preserved the patristic

writings were not inclined to tell much about

any dark elements in their ecclesiastical story and thus those perspectives were either initially kept out of or later filtered out of the record. As part of Nibley’s discussion of that problem in early church historiography, he

briefly brought up the topic of apostles and bishops, particularly the issue of succession.

Almost in passing (as if all of his readers

were aware of what he had taught in the

classroom the year before), he pointed out

the following summation:

But aren’t we forgetting about Christ’s

“successors”? A “successor” is one who

comes after and takes the place of another.

To be a successor it is not enough merely to outlive another or come after him; one must

hold his identical office and function. Even a regent is not successor to a king—only a

king can be that; when a vice president

takes over on the death of a president, he

does not become his successor until he, too, is president. The scriptures never call the

apostles Christ’s successors; there is only one successor to the Lord mentioned in the

Bible, and that is the Holy Ghost, “whom

the Father will send in my name, he shall

teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said

unto you” (John 14:26). Here is a true

successor, coming expressly to take the

Lord’s place: “If I go not away, the

Comforter will not come unto you; but if I

depart, I will send him unto you” (John

16:7). Sent by the same authority, he will do the very same work, speak the identical

words, be a witness for the judgment, and

guide the apostles in all things exactly as the Lord had done (John 16:8–15).

As for the disciples, the famous passage

in Mark (13:34–37) describes them as

servants left behind with authorization to do special jobs: the Lord “left his house, and

gave to his servants the authority, to each

one his task, and commanded the porter to

watch.” There is no mention of supreme

authority being given to anyone, but to each

the authority for his particular work. The fact that every soldier in the army acts with the authority of the commander-in-chief

does not give any one of them the fulness of authority that he possesses. 1

Nibley’s identification of consequences

that flowed from the lack of true apostolic

successors, so fully covered in these

lectures, was not included in “The Way of

the Church.” Perhaps he minimized his

discussion of that dimension because he had

already covered it in depth in these lectures and thus felt confident in simply stating his end results. He did, however, reflect a little further on the question of how such an

extensive loss could possibly have occurred.

First, he pointed to some who were

conscious betrayers from the inside: “Others died other ways, but the great danger comes

from betrayal—the pagans can neither betray

nor corrupt nor pervert the gospel; only

members can do that.” 2 But on further reflection, he allowed that much of this

happened unawares:

The great apostasy did not happen

consciously. The mentally ill (“O foolish

Galatians, who hath bewitched you”?

[Galatians 3:1]) do not know what is wrong

with them or when it happened. What the

apostles denounce most strenuously in their

letters is the complete complacency and

self-satisfaction of the perverters: “Lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,

proud. … Traitors, heady, highminded” (2

Timothy 3:2–4). No lack of assurance here!

Like the slinging of a noose, the end

comes silently, quietly, without warning, so that the victim never suspects what is

happening, being the while wholly

preoccupied with the “cares of this life”

(Luke 21:34). It is not a process of founding new institutions that the scriptures describe, but one of becoming: “love shall turn to

hate,” “evil men and seducers shall wax

worse and worse” (2 Timothy 3:13),

“iniquity shall increase,” “the sheep of the fold shall turn into wolves” ( Didache)—but go right on calling themselves sheep! The

false claimants never give up, “Having a

form of godliness, but denying the power

thereof” (2 Timothy 3:5). The end was

never formally declared (heaven forbid!); in the words of Polycarp, “the lights went

out. ”3

With Polycarp, Nibley regretted that some

of the most important and luminous lights of the gospel and priesthood authority went out in the early years of Christianity, but he was quick to remind readers that the world had

been forewarned and that the early

Christians should not have expected to be

received by the world any more warmly than

had been the Savior himself. In response to

those who asked, “But even if the apostles

were to suffer the same rejection and death

as the master, is not the gloom of the ‘second

act’ relieved by the survival of the church?

What of the ‘little children’ whom they

taught?” Nibley soberly replied, “Alas! they are given the same promise of extinction;

they, too, are required to ‘endure to the end’

and are given the same comfort and promise

—eternal life.” 4

Indeed, throughout these lectures and his

other writings on early Christian history,

Nibley was sparring intellectually with

various antagonists. For example, he was

keenly aware of one Catholic writer who

had dismissively declared: “The failure of

the Mormon spokesmen to explain when,

where, and how the present Catholic Church

was founded exposes the fatal weakness of

their accusation” that a great apostasy had

occurred. In response, Nibley was eager to

show that “the New Testament is only one of

many, many sources that clearly ‘explain

when, where, and how’ the Christian church

completely changed its nature and the present churches came to be what they are.” 5

Nibley was quick to enlist to his aid

unwitting allies from various camps.

“Earnest investigators of church history,

Catholic and Protestant alike,” Nibley

happily pointed out, “are discovering as it

were for the first time the great gulf that lies between the ancient church and conventional

Christianity, and being surprisingly frank in their comments. More and more they are

forcing themselves also to face up to the dark interval of the second act,” namely the foggy close of the apostolic era. 6 In tune with those scholarly observations, Nibley formulated

questions and set an agenda for further

Latter-day Saint engagement with this area of research:

What, then, did happen after the

apostles? Do we have reliable reports for

the years following? Was it all bad? How did

the Christians continue to think of the world and their position in it? Did they expect the lights to go out? Were they surprised when

they did? Were they disappointed when the

Lord failed to come? Did they believe that

what was happening actually was the end?

Such questions are the special food of

church history in our day. The mere fact

that they are being asked now as never

before is an invitation to Latter-day Saints to enter the discussion which seems at last

to be turning to their own point of view. 7

Over the ensuing six years, Nibley

continued to expand his repertoire of insights and arguments, formulating answers to these

questions. Ultimately, in 1961 he published

an arresting article, “The Passing of the

Primitive Church: Forty Variations on an

Unpopular Theme,” in the prestigious journal Church History. His opening and closing remarks in that article serve as his final

published word on the subject of the project

that began with these 1954 lectures about the offices of apostle and bishop in the early

church. In this final exposition, he introduced what he called the “somber theme” of the

passing of the primitive church with these

pointed questions and penetrating

observations:

Ever since Eusebius sought with

dedicated zeal to prove the survival of the

church by blazing a trail back to the

apostles, the program of church history has

been the same: “To give a clear and

comprehensive, scientifically established

view of the development of the visible

institution of salvation founded by Christ.”

To describe it—not to question it. By its

very definition church history requires

unquestioning acceptance of the basic

proposition that the church did survive. One may write endlessly about The Infant

Church, l’Eglise naissante, die Pflanzung der Kirche, etc., but one may not ask why the early Christians themselves described

their church not as a lusty infant but as an old and failing woman; one may trace the

triumphant spread of The Unquenchable

Light through storm and shadow, but one may not ask why Jesus himself insisted that

the Light was to be taken away. Church

history seems to be resolved never to raise

the fundamental question of survival as the

only way of avoiding a disastrous answer,

and the normal reaction to the question—

did the church remain on earth?—has not

been serious inquiry in a richly documented

field, but shocked recoil from the edge of an abyss into which few can look without a

shudder.

Yet today that question is being asked

again, as it has been in other times of stress and crisis, not with the journalistic flourish of Soltau’s Sind wir noch Christen? but with the cautious historical appraisal of an H. J. Schoeps, contemplating the age-old

tension between eschatology and church

with their conflicting ideas about the

church’s future. Can it be that the

repugnance of churchmen to eschatology and their coolness toward the authentic

writings of the early Fathers are due in no

small part to the dim view which the

primitive Christians took of the prospects of the church? The purpose of this paper is to

list briefly the principal arguments

supporting the thesis that the church

founded by Jesus and the apostles did not

survive and was not expected to. 8

Likewise, the purpose of this series of

lectures was to marshal evidence supporting

the more focused but similar thesis that the early Christian bishops did not, any sooner, succeed in filling the office that distinctively belonged to the apostles. Thus, Nibley’s

parting words at the end of “The Passing of

the Primitive Church” may readily serve just as well as the final punctuation for this book of lectures: “We have indicated above some

of the reasons for suggesting that the church, like its founder, his apostles, and the

prophets before them, came into the world, did the works of the Father, and then went out of the world, albeit with a promise of return. Some aspects of the problem, at least, deserve closer attention than students have

hitherto been willing to give them. ”9

John W. Welch

John F. Hall

Notes

1. Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4

(Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS,

1987), 273.

2. Mormonism and Early Christianity, 284.

3. Mormonism and Early Christianity, 287–88.

4. Mormonism and Early Christianity, 279.

5. Mormonism and Early Christianity, 284.

6. Mormonism and Early Christianity, 297.

7. Mormonism and Early Christianity, 298.

8. Mormonism and Early Christianity, 168–69.

9. Mormonism and Early Christianity, 193–94.

Document Outline

Editors’ Preface

Overview

The Office of Bishop in the Early Christian Church as a Whole The Waxing and Waning of the “Consensus”

An Apostle Is Not the Same as a Bishop

When Bishops Became the Highest Officers in the Church

Seeing James as the Presiding Bishop of the Church

The Bishop as an Office in the Lower Priesthood

Dependence on Jewish Sources for Church Practices Relevant to the Bishop

The Jewish and Worldly Origins of the Office and Title of Bishop

Changes in the Office of Bishop

Roman Origin of a Divine Office?

The Importance of Each Bishop Becomes Tied to the Prominence of His City

The Fight for Power

In Search of a General Authority

The Glories (and Duties?) of a Bishop

Are the Council and the Synod the Apostolic Voice?

The Gospel of Bigness and Power

The Office of Bishop in the Church in Rome In Search of a Missing Link

Questions about the Account of the Ordination of Clement as a Bishop

Finding (or Not Finding) the Bishop (or Bishops) of Rome

Strife over the Elections of the Bishop of Rome

The Establishment of an Episcopal Hierarchy and College of Cardinals

The Roman Role and the Big Four

The Double Apostolate: Peter and Paul

Clement to the Corinthians—Proof of Roman Supremacy?

The Leading Role the Roman Church Did Not Play

Establishing a Connection with Peter—A Return to Matthew 16:18

Emperors, Popes, Synods, and Rome

Claims of Apostolic Succession

The Argument of Diffusion

Editors’ Postscript

=== END BOOK ===
