=== BEGIN BOOK ===
BOOK_ID: NIBLEY_CW_V17
TITLE: The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, Vol. 17 Eloquent Witness Nibley on Himself, Others, and the Temple
FORMAT: TXT (normalized line endings; HTML entities unescaped)
NOTE: Use this file as the canonical source for retrieval/quoting.
=== END HEADER ===

Collected Works of Hugh Nibley

Eloquent Witness

Nibley on Himself, Others, and the Temple

Hugh Nibley

© 2008 Deseret Book Company.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission in writing from the publisher, Deseret Book Company, P.O. Box 30178, Salt Lake City Utah 30178. This work is not an official publication of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The views expressed herein are the responsibility of the author and do not necessarily represent the position of the Church or of Deseret Book. Deseret Book is a registered trademark of Deseret Book Company.

Table of Contents

Key to Abbreviations

Key to Abbreviations

Foreword

Autobiographies

Some Very Vital Statistics

An Intellectual Autobiography

Interviews

Hugh Nibley: The Faithful Scholar

Nibliography

A Conversation with Hugh Nibley

Hugh Nibley and Kimball Hansen: Candidates for the "Search Society"

A Legendary Passion for Books and Languages

Nibley Talks about Contemporary Issues

Reviews by Hugh Nibley

Review of Our Book of Mormon

Review of The Ancient World

Review of History of Syria

Review of Near Eastern Culture and Society

Review of The Torment of Secrecy

Forewords by Hugh Nibley

Foreword to Learn Greek through the New Testament

Foreword to Working toward Zion

Personal

The Christmas Quest

Nobody to Blame

Dear Sterling

The Faith of an Observer: Conversations with Hugh Nibley

Not to Worry

The Last Days, Then and Now

The Word of Wisdom: A Commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 89

A Commentary on the Gospel of Matthew

Turning the Time Over to . . . Priesthood

Tribute to Krešimir ?osi?

Graveside Service Address for Joel Erik Myres

Temples

The Greatness of Egypt

Meanings and Functions of Temples

A House of Glory

On the Sacred and the Symbolic

Assembly and Atonement

Abraham's Temple Drama

Temples Everywhere

Key to Abbreviations

CWHN The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley JNES Journal of Near Eastern Studies

PG J.-P. Migne, ed., Patrologiae Cursus Completus . . . Series Graeca, 161 vols. (Paris: Garnier, 1857–66)

PL J.-P. Migne, ed., Patrologiae Cursus Completus . . . Series Latina, 221 vols. (Paris: Garnier, 1844–64)

ZÄS Zeitschrift für ägyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde

Foreword

I first became acquainted with Hugh Nibley’s writing as a studious and highly energetic young man in California. When I was thirteen, I read Nibley’s The World and the Prophets, which tells in simple, straightforward, yet eloquent language of the loss of authority in the early Christian church. As clearly as anything, Nibley makes the case for the triumph of the philosophers and the discomfiture of apostolic authority. The ideas in The World and the Prophets set my mind on fire. Nibley became my academic idol and has remained so to this day. Nibley’s example of serious scholarship in the service of the kingdom made me want to become an academic as well. Though the path I have followed has been somewhat different, he blazed the trail for me.

I first met Nibley formally after having come up to BYU with my parents in the spring of 1968. He was housed at BYU in one of the long, narrow offices in the old Joseph Smith Building—an office that was nothing more than a glorified and enlarged walk-in closet with high ceilings. My father had known Nibley personally during the 1930s while they were doctoral students at the University of California at Berkeley and had some interesting stories to tell about him. Even as I was being introduced to him, Nibley’s level of absorption in the subject he was working on put him in a trancelike state. I asked him for some advice on where to study about the ancient world in graduate school. Without a moment’s hesitation he said, “Study at Brandeis with [Cyrus H.] Gordon.” Though I didn’t take him up on his suggestion (like Nibley, I took my Ph.D. at Berkeley), I have much appreciated Gordon’s imagination, creativity, and willingness to take a risk, traits that Nibley greatly admired. (This encounter, however, was probably not the first time that I had ever seen Nibley: I have vague recollections of him sitting on the stand to speak at the old Berkeley Ward chapel—he was a visiting professor at Berkeley in 1960 when I was a young boy.)

Hugh Nibley was a man of profound learning. Nibley’s brief (and slightly impersonal) sketch of his academic career that appears in this volume does not take note of the spectacular intellectual abilities that he demonstrated early in his life; his passionate attachment to, and capacity for, focused library work; and his astonishing ability to concentrate on a topic to the exclusion of everything else. One anecdote illustrates this: my father’s friend, Dil Jensen—a fellow Latter-day Saint who himself was studying toward a Ph.D. in the life sciences—saw Nibley walking down the street toward the university library engrossed in a book; he leaned out the window of his apartment, caught Nibley’s attention, and asked him if he had eaten. Nibley, distracted from his reverie, looked at his watch, noted the hour, and said, “Oh, it’s 6:15, so I must already have eaten, but thanks anyway.” He then opened up the book and started reading again as he continued on his way to the library.

Even as a young man, Nibley’s gifts were already becoming evident. He wrote highly praised poetry, his drawings as a teenager are admirable, and he was an accomplished pianist and organist. My father tells a story about him that illustrates his musical interests. Members of the Berkeley Ward were asked to clean the yard around the chapel as a service project. My father and Nibley volunteered to help. Hugh came and worked. When the work became tedious, Hugh went into the chapel and played on the pipe organ for a few minutes before coming out and resuming work on the yard.

One of the stunning aspects of Nibley’s genius was his persistent sense of wonder, a sense of wonder that induced him to range widely through very disparate subjects of study—all covered in this volume: the ancient Egyptians, the temple, the life sciences, world literature, ancient Judaism, and Joseph Smith and the restoration. A review of the table of contents of this volume reveals the breadth of Nibley’s interests: some autobiographical sketches, interviews, book reviews, and forewords to books, letters, memorial tributes, and various writings about the temple. In light of his comprehensive and intense interests, we may better understand the story told by Hugh’s older brother Sloan in “Faith of an Observer” (which appears in this volume) of Hugh breathlessly running into Sloan’s room in the middle of the night and asking him if there had been an occlusion of Venus—in his reminiscences of that event Sloan was still puzzled why Hugh would even be interested in an occlusion of Venus and definitely did not care to see it himself (p. 151, below).

In his exploration of the life sciences, Nibley discovered there the reason for the infinitesimal improbability, if not impossibility, of life on earth, and yet its continued existence nonetheless. As he cites from Lyall Watson in an interview published in this volume, “Any kind of order is unnatural and happens only by chance encounters. These events are statistically unlikely and the further combination of molecules into anything as highly organized as a living organism is wildly improbable. Life is a rare and unreasonable thing. . . Life occurs by chance and the probability of its occurring and continuing is infinitesimal” (p. 28, below). Observed Nibley: “Seen from the point of view of the biologist, just as from the point of view of the astronomer, we have no business being here. . . . With over a million forms of life on earth, to believe that this took place only by chance places a great strain on the credulity of even the most mechanistic biologist” (p. 28, below).

Nibley lived what he taught: he placed great stress on Zion and took no care for his own comforts. In “Faith of an Observer,” Hugh noted “four things we should never look for. The first thing is gain, the second is power, the third is popularity, and the fourth is the lusts of the flesh” (cf. 1 Nephi 22:23). “What should be our objectives?” he asked (p. 179, below). Nibley pointed to the Book of Abraham as a guide for us: a member of a Zion society would seek for “greater peace and rest for me, . . . the blessings of the fathers, and the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same; having been myself a follower of righteousness” (cf. Abraham 1:2). This leads to some earnest and modest reflections on the purpose of life on earth: “We’re just sort of dabbling around, playing around, being tested for our moral qualities, and above all the two things that we can be good at, and no two other things we can do: We can forgive and we can repent. It’s the gospel of repentance. . . . Nobody’s very clever, nobody’s very brave, nobody’s very strong, nobody’s very wise. We’re all pretty stupid. Nobody’s very anything. We’re not tested in those things, but in the things the angels envy us for: we can forgive and we can repent. So . . . let’s start repenting as of now” (p. 162, below). Nibley thought sincerely about the welfare of Zion rather than his own, an attitude that was unlike the subtle hypocrisy of those he campaigned with on various political projects. Though his oft-repeated and unchallenged reference to the moral equivalency of the Soviet Union and the United States might be faulted, the sincerity of his zeal for Zion could not. We can see from his brief autobiographies and retrospectives included in this volume what induced him to look to Zion for redemption.

Nibley’s towering intellect was matched only by his immense and nearly childlike faith. When interviewed for “Faith of an Observer,” he was asked about the strength of his faith. He responded that his faith had remained strong throughout his life, except for one occasion when he was a young man and was bothered about the afterlife. That night he met Matthias Cowley, the father of Matthew Cowley, who was speaking in the Hollywood Ward. “As soon as he took my hand,” Hugh continued, “he said, ‘Come with me. I want to give you a blessing.’ The blessing was that the Lord would give an answer immediately to the thing that had been puzzling my mind. Within the week I had an appendicitis attack, and so we went to the old Seventh-day Adventist hospital out in Loma Linda and had the appendix taken out.” In the course of the operation Hugh swallowed his tongue and was at one time clinically dead. During that time he had a near-death experience, which answered affirmatively “whether there was anything on the other side. When I came out there, I didn’t meet anything or anybody else, but I looked around, and not only was I in possession of all my faculties, but they were tremendous. . . . Above all, I was interested in problems. I’d missed a lot of math and stuff like that. Now in five minutes I would be able to make up for that. Remember, as Joseph Smith said, ‘If you could look for five minutes into yonder heavens,’ you can forget about all the rest you ever bothered about” (pp. 161–62, below).

Nibley was a trailblazer. As has often been observed, he was like a person eagerly going from door to door of various rooms in a house, opening the doors of each room, peering in to see what was there, and then pressing on to open more doors, leaving further exploration to others. Like Joseph Smith, he laid the groundwork, set the tone, and asked the relevant questions. We, his successors, are like Brigham Young, establishing a firmer foundation, fleshing out the details, and exploring further.

I wish to thank Shirley Ricks for her editorial skills and for coordinating the innumerable tasks necessary to prepare this book for publication, Jacob Rawlins for typesetting the volume, and Suzanne Brady of Deseret Book for seeing this volume through to publication. I would also like to thank those who have contributed to the completion of this volume through data entry, source checking, editing, proofreading, artwork, and consultations: Alison Coutts, Evan G. Crockett, Ben Crowder, John Gee, Jordan Hanavan, Paula Hicken, Jacob Johnson, Brette Jones, Sam Keele, Kelley Konzak, Michael Lyon, Phyllis Nibley, Linda Sheffield, Marisa Snyder, Keegan Taylor, Sandra Thorne, John W. Welch, Landon Wiest, and Daniel Wilding.

Stephen D. Ricks

Part 1

Autobiographies

1

Some Very Vital Statistics

Hugh Nibley took five years to go through the Los Angeles High School, due to the willingness with which he conformed to those patterns of intellectual nonconformity which were a must in the 1920s. In the spirit of the times he published poems in the Lyric West and various anthologies and designed and constructed astronomical instruments of Eolithic simplicity and refinement.

At seventeen he went to the Swiss and German Mission, ending up his activities in Athens. This allowed him to consolidate studies in Greek and Anglo-Saxon begun at a tender age.

Mission was followed by four regrettable years at UCLA, with emphasis on medieval studies. Graduating with high honors in 1934, he went to Berkeley and took up Semitic studies, becoming University Fellow in History (the chairman of the fellowship committee happened to be the professor of Semitic languages). One day the writer received a cylindrical object in the mail—a Ph.D. certificate which was a polite way of telling him he was getting to be a nuisance in the stacks.

This short autobiography, although never published, may have been intended as an introduction to a series.

During four years of practice teaching at the Claremont Colleges in California, the writer taught history and languages to students of Pomona and Scripps under the amusing title of Lecturer in History and Social Philosophy (they like to be different in Claremont—like everybody else).

In 1942 he joined the army to avoid a worse fate. Weather school at Chanute Field was followed, army fashion, by transfer to the subterranean recesses of mysterious Camp Ritchie for eight months of memorizing in minute detail the organization, strategy, and tactics of the German army—all of which had changed completely by the time the course was finished. Pleasant months in the leisurely confusion of Hyde Park Corner and the British War Office in London were brutally terminated by assignment to the 101st Airborne Division, where the author spent the entire year of 1944, parting company with the beloved division to live the life of Riley with CIC spy hunters (what a joke!), then with the frantic careerists of the Twelfth and the easygoing brotherhood of the Sixth Army Group. He ended up the war in Heidelberg, spending half a year in fairly intimate contact with the Russians. From Heidelberg to Provo was a natural transition.

Background of the Present Series

At the Brigham Young University the writer soon discovered that everyone claimed to be an expert on the ancient world—the library did in fact possess one Greek book (Homer) and one Latin book (Manilius), even if nobody could read them—so he turned his attention to Church history. At first, however, the excellent Arabic collection which he had been able to build up in Europe suggested a study on Lehi in the desert, while his recent contacts with the children of the steppes stirred speculative thoughts on the Jaredites—series on these subjects duly appeared in the Improvement Era. But all the time the never-silent drone-bass of the past eight years in Provo has been the reading of the literature of the early Church. The sabbatical year of 1953 was spent entirely at Harvard and Berkeley, filling in the gaps for the present study. At present a good and growing collection of early Christian materials is being built at the Brigham Young University, so that it should be possible before many years to undertake serious study of some aspects of Church history without leaving Utah.

The Present Series

The events and discoveries of the years since WWII have given rise to an unprecedented amount of speculation on the real nature of the Christian Church. New finds have required the readjustment of all the long-established and prevailing ideas on the subject. Of key significance in contemporary discussion is the problem of the expectations of the early Christians regarding their Church: was it to remain firm and steadfast on the earth, to convert Babylon and spread steadily and irresistibly to the end of time? Every indication is that the ancient Christians themselves anticipated no such future for their Church. Was Christ to come in glory in a few days? Was the final judgment expected momentarily? Scholars are beginning to declare that there is nothing in the record to justify attributing such a belief to the primitive Christians. What, then, did they expect would be the Way of the Church? There is no shortage of documents to answer this question clearly and unequivocally, but the answer is so retrograde to the interests and established teachings of the Christian world that great skill and ingenuity have been exercised to conceal it.

The present series simply takes up the texts in chronological order and considers what each has to say about the future of the Church and the world. All the major periods into which the texts fall are today being reconsidered: the apocryphal background of Christianity has been given new importance by the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls in Palestine; the New Testament itself read in the light of new inquiry is leading scholars to surprising conclusions which a few years ago would have been unthinkable; the same is true of the so-called apostolic fathers, at present undergoing a thorough reappraisal in several quarters; new discoveries in Egypt are playing their part in a complete reevaluation of the genuine and serious elements in teaching which anciently went under the Christian label; throughout the centuries the later fathers—whose works nobody has read for generations—are found constantly to declare their belief in the temporary nature of the Church on this earth. How did they think of the Church? How could they reconcile the work of Christ with an institution which was not marked for success? In the train of those key questions a host of other questions gathers. The purpose of this series is to answer those questions in the words of the ancients themselves, so that the reader may take his own bearings in the radically shifting scene of Church history.

2

An Intellectual Autobiography

First appearing as “An Intellectual Autobiography – HN” in Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless: Classic Essays of Hugh W. Nibley (Provo, UT: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1978), xix–xxviii, this essay was reprinted as “Self-Portrait: An Intellectual Autobiography by Hugh Nibley,” in BYU Today, August 1978, 11–13, and also as “An Intellectual Autobiography: Some High and Low Points,” in Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless, 2nd ed. (Provo, UT: BYU Religious Studies Center, 2004), xxix–xxxviii. This verson of the essay is from the 2nd edition.

Those who ask, what is the meaning of life? and get no reassuring answers have been known to conclude that the whole thing is a cruel joke. If we are supposed to find the answers, they say, why are they hidden? Precisely because we are supposed to find them, which means we must look for them. The treasure is buried to keep us digging; the pearl of great price lies glittering in the depths where we must seek it out. Treasure hunts can be both instructive and fun, provided the clues are not too discouraging, and kind Providence has strewn the most exciting and obvious clues all over the place. It is only when we choose to ignore them, like the pigheaded constable in the English murder mystery, blind to all but his own opinion, that we court frustration and cynicism.

As an infant I entertained an abiding conviction that there were things of transcendent import awaiting my attention. So I kept wandering away from where I was supposed to be. Adults find that attitude upsetting: the scientist or scholar who looks twice before formulating a conclusion has only scorn for the layman who looks only once, but he will give a bad time to any student of his who presumes to look farther than he has and can never forgive the younger person who actually discovers something. Yet from every side the hints continue to pour in, as they have since the beginning of time; every decibel or photon brings to our human receptors more information than anyone has yet deciphered. My own reactions to these generous stimuli have been inadequate and hesitant, but the hints themselves may be worth mentioning. Here are some of the more potent ones, registered decade by decade.

The 1910s

In Portland in 1910 the great rain forests began a few miles from our home on every side, proclaiming in their primal magnificence the kind of world God intended this to be. But the world that men were hewing out of the forest was something else. My grandparents, especially Grandma Sloan, still believed that we were in the last days and could tell us why. Everybody else, including my parents, was cool to that idea—progress and prosperity were the watchword. And what did the signals say? As we stood on the little station platform at Gearhart Beach at the end of our last summer there, the family could hear a lumber company a mile away in the towering woods noisily beginning what was to be the total destruction of the greatest rain forest in the world. My father obligingly explained that the lumber company was only acting in the national interest, since spruce wood makes the best propellers, and a strong air force was necessary to a strong and free America. But it was another message that reached and offended childish ears from that misty battleground of man against nature. A little later I understood better what was going on.

The 1920s

I began my second decade in southern California as a compulsive reader, memorizing Shakespeare plays and aspiring to add something to the bard’s modest contribution. But English literature I soon found to be derivative, and so took to Old English to find what was behind it; what was behind it was Latin, and what was behind that was Greek. In those days we thought that you had reached the beginning of everything with the Greeks. Ministers and missionaries retiring to southern California in the twenties flooded the dusty bookstores on Main, Spring, and Los Angeles Streets with an astonishing wealth of antique and exotic texts (at two bits a volume), thus abetting and implementing my undisciplined researches. But if you really want to get back of reality, science is the thing; and, as Karl Popper assures us, all science is cosmology. I became a passionate amateur astronomer—only to discover that everybody wanted to be a scientist, while all the written records of the race, as legitimate an object of purely scientific interest as any fossil or spectrum, were consigned to all but total neglect in the hands of aesthetes and pedants. I began to suspect that the records had something very important to convey to us, hints and clues that lay waiting in densely compacted deposits of the human past—others were busy in the lab, but who really cares what is in the stacks?

In the twenties business was booming, as you may have heard, and I got a good look at some big men who played golf at Brentwood, Wilshire, and the L.A. Country Club; dull, profane men they were, who cheated on every stroke, just about. When my admiring father asked one of them at dinner what he considered to be his greatest achievement in life, the man unhesitatingly replied that it was his celebrated filibuster to keep James Joyce’s Ulysses (a book of which, as literature, I was very fond) out of the land. One summer, at fifteen, I worked in the Nibley-Stoddard sawmill in the Feather River Canyon and came to know all manner of men. Later my grandfather (Charles W. Nibley), impressed by my premature pedantry, told me how much money was made in the lumber business, a painful theme that cannot be pursued at this time. The thing for schoolboys to do in those halcyon days was to work in mills or ranches in the summer, or to become seasonal tramps. Full of the Concord School, I spent six weeks alone in the Umpqua forest between Crater Lake and the Three Sisters, quite a wild place then, and learned that nature is kind but just and severe—if you get in trouble you have yourself to thank for it. It was another story down in the valley, where I learned that there were kindhearted tramps who knew far more than any teacher I had had— I mean about literature and science—but tramped because they preferred passing through this world as observers of God’s works. For such a luxury they paid a heavy price: in any small town in the nation anyone not visibly engaged either in making or spending money was quickly apprehended and locked up as a dangerous person—a vagrant. Everywhere, I learned very well, the magic words were “Have you any money?”—Satan’s golden question. Freedom to come and go was only for people who had the stuff—in fact you could have anything in this world for it.

Within a year the tramping continued, this time among the amused or resentful villagers of the Black Forest and the Rhine Plain. President Tadje, one of the few great men I have known, allowed me to do it my way. By bicycle in summer and afoot in winter I went alone (my companions thought I was overdoing it), carrying the gospel to Catholic, Lutheran, and Calvinist (they were the toughest) villages. The people were still peasants in those days, living in the Middle Ages in their wildly picturesque storybook towns. Surprisingly, the work was not entirely unsuccessful—the gospel message readily leapt the immense cultural gap, passing through the ever-so-tenuous medium of faith that is common to all cultures and all religions. It was a different story when I knocked on the doors of professors and industrialists in the university and factory towns. German Wissenschaft had long since severed all ties with any gospel but its own proud, self-contained positivism; literally, they were without a culture and without religion. The hints were clear enough: the infernal machine of our age was made in Germany.

At the end of my mission President Tadje let me go to Greece to carry messages to some native members of the Church and to make contact with some who had recently migrated from Turkey in a great influx of refugees. Those marvelous Greeks, cheerful and courteous, exuding the spirit of good will, with nothing to eat and nowhere to live! I took long walks, sleeping in the hills, and had a shock from which I never recovered. While I was circulating among displaced persons (under surveillance, of course), my stuff was stolen from the fleabag hotel where I was staying. That made me an outcast among the outcasts. I spoke English, but also German and French, and my clothes were certainly not American—how could suspicious officials know where I really came from or what I might be running away from? My passport turned up at the American Express, but that was not the problem. By what right did I lay claim to affluence and security while all the people around me had none? How could a few rubber stamps place me in an exalted station? True, the stamps were only symbols, like money, but symbols of what? Hadn’t those others worked as hard as I? Worse still, what was I if my sacred identity depended on who somebody else said or believed I was? If a bored petty official had decided not to make some phone calls, I could have become a nonperson forever. Legal fictions had supplanted intrinsic worth and faith in God and man; it was the papers that everybody was grabbing for in those desperate times. And what were the papers really worth? I soon found out when I returned to the big house in Glendale on 1 January 1930 and was told how many thousand American millionaires had just become paupers overnight.

The 1930s

At UCLA I quickly learned the knack of getting grades, a craven surrender to custom, since grades had little to do with learning. Still, that was during the Depression, when people of little faith were clinging to institutions for survival, and so I went along, as timid and insecure as the rest of them. What sort of thinking went on there? The man I worked for as an assistant refused to read Spengler “because he is not even a full professor!” Staggering, isn’t it? I have never thought of an answer to that one. Nobody stood alone; the only way they all stayed on their feet was by leaning on each other for support, like a stand of toothpicks. Berkeley was more of the same, with one difference—they had a library. I decided to put it all together in the stacks beginning at the southwest corner of the ninth level and working down to the northeast corner of the first level, book by book, stopping whenever something significant caught my eye. It took four years, and then one day a cardboard tube came in the mail. It contained another passport, this time even more magical than the one with the rubber stamps. I may have forgotten the very names of the courses and teachers that qualified me as a Ph.D., but this pretty document assured me that from here on it was all safely stored in steel filing cabinets in the registrar’s office.

I had started out at Berkeley as Professor Popper’s only pupil in Arabic (next year there were three of us in Hebrew) and spent an awful lot of time at it, which could have been better spent elsewhere. But what an Aladdin’s cave of hints! All an Arabic writer will ever give you is hints, and you build up your world from them. The most illustrious visiting scholar of the time was Werner Jaeger, who favored me with long chats and frank revelations over the teacups (my refusal to drink the stuff made an indelible impression on him and his wife). Professor Jaeger knew very well, he told me, that the Greeks were part of a wider Oriental complex, but he had to bypass all that in his study of the Greek mind, because it tended to disturb the neatness and balance of his great work on Greek education. Typical was the committee’s rejection of my first subject for a thesis: I wanted to write about the perennial phenomenon of the mob in the ancient world; but the committee found the subject altogether too unreal, too irrelevant to the mood and spirit of the modern world, to appeal even to normal curiosity. How could you expect such men to be aware of the desperately lonely and unhappy young people all around them, seething with resentment and building up to some kind of an explosion (which occurred in the sixties), frustrated at every turn as they asked for the bread of life and got only processed academic factory food served at an automat?

At the Claremont Colleges I taught everything under the sun, including American civilization on alternate days with Everett Dean Martin (who was still famous then) and junior humanities alternating with Edgar Goodspeed, retired from the University of Chicago. I also taught the history of education and received the most sinister vibrations of all: it took no prophetic gift to see that no good could come of the highly successful efforts of Dewey, Kilpatrick, and the rest to supplant all religion and culture by their own brand of the new, emancipated, manipulated society. At the request of President Russell M. Storey (the second great man I have known), I took notes when a few celebrities would gather at his house in connection with the work of a committee on war objectives and peace aims. There we could talk with such notables as Lewis Mumford, T. V. Smith, Thomas Mann, and Edward S. Corvin. It was heady stuff, but very soon I was getting a much more instructive view of the scene from closer up.

The 1940s

In high school I had won the proficiency medal as the best soldier in the ROTC. Now I was a master sergeant doing paperwork in military intelligence at every level and keeping my eyes open. Mr. Tucker used to come down from Washington to Camp Ritchie with exciting news of what went on in high places; for example, there was the fabulous Miss Crawford in the British War Office who knew every secret of the German Army; and in time, behold, it was I who ended up as Miss Crawford’s assistant, she being a fussy redheaded spinster who got all her information from newspapers and magazines and kept all the clippings stirred up in a shoebox. That is how it is done. The army is correctly defined (by Robert Heinlein) as “a permanent organization for the destruction of life and property.” The business of the 101 A/B Division, to which I was attached through the winter of 1943 and all of 1944, was to search out and destroy; all the rest of the vast military enterprise was simply supportive of that one objective. “Good hunting!” was the general’s stock admonition before takeoff. My business was to know more about the German Army than anyone else and to brief division personnel at every level on that meaningful subject both before and during operations. What I saw on every side was the Mahan principle in full force, that “great secret” of converting life into property— your life for my property, also your life for my promotion (known as the Catch-22 principle). Attached to army groups and various intelligence units during 1945, I took my jeep all over western Europe and beheld the whole thing as a vast business operation. I well remember the pain and distress expressed at headquarters as the war wound down and twilight descended on brilliant military careers, high living, and unlimited financial manipulations; and how great was the rejoicing when the new concept of “brush-fire wars” was announced to the staff—a simple plan to keep the whole thing going, safely contained and at a safe distance. O peace, where is thy sting? The Mahan principle was still in full force and remains so to this day.

After the war I worked for the Improvement Era on the top floor of the stately Church Office Building on South Temple Street in Salt Lake City and came to know another kind of headquarters. I also got to know some of the General Authorities quite well. There were scientists, scholars, and even poets among their number. One useful thing on the premises was a good collection of anti-Mormon literature. So when Mrs. Brodie’s highly fictitious biography of Joseph Smith appeared I became involved in that direction: what I said about Mrs. B. and her methods is exactly what more competent reviewers have said about her more recent Life of Jefferson. The bona fides of the prophet center around the Book of Mormon—another happy coincidence: on the eve (week) of the Normandy invasion, I had in London blown all my savings on Arabic books from the collections of Howells and Ellis, both of whom had conveniently died at that point in time. Lacking other sources, I turned to my own books for an Old World approach to the Book of Mormon that kept me going for years.

The 1950s

In 1950 the Dead Sea Scrolls began to come out, along with the equally interesting Coptic texts from Nag Hammadi in Egypt, fusing early Judaism and Christianity in a way that conventional churches and scholars found very disturbing but which fit the Book of Mormon like a glove. Then in 1951 Brigham Young University acquired both the Greek and Latin Patrologiae and the Egyptian collection of the venerable Samuel A. B. Mercer, he who had spearheaded the attack on the Book of Abraham back in 1912. Here indeed was a treasure trove of hints, including some very enlightening ones about Mercer himself. At last we had something to work with in the Patrologiae. But to be taken seriously one must publish, and I soon found that publishing in the journals is as easy and mechanical as getting grades: I sent out articles to a wide variety of prestigious journals, and they were all printed. So I lost interest. What those people were after is not what I was after. Above all, I could see no point to going on through the years marshalling an ever-lengthening array of titles to stand at attention some day at the foot of an obituary. That is what they were all working for, and they were welcome to it. But there were hints I could not ignore and answers I must seek for my own peace of mind. There was one thing every student of the past has overlooked: here at our doorsteps among the Arizona Indians lies the world’s best clue to the spiritual history of the race. Nowhere else on earth will one find the old cycle of the year-rites still observed in full force and unbroken continuity from the beginning. When Brother Virgil Bushman, a great missionary to the Hopis, started taking me to the villages with him, I could hardly credit the devotion and courage with which a little band of less than five thousand people had kept alive a language and a culture which preserved the practices and beliefs of our own ancestors from prehistoric times until nineteenth-century industrialism severed the umbilical cord. Here the clues are both exhilarating and depressing, hopeful and sinister, as nowhere else.

The 1960s

The fifties ended in Berkeley as a visiting professor in humanities, with classical rhetoric as the main subject. As in the novels of C. P. Snow, the faculty there had but one objective in life—to achieve eminence—and all labored under the pathetic illusion that mere association with a prestigious institution was the nearest thing to human satisfaction that this life could offer. As to the single-minded dedication to the search for truth, forget it! Take away the audience, and the great professor quickly lapses into the easy hobbies and trivialities of retirement. With nobody looking on, the game loses all its interest. And there is nothing else, for “how can ye believe, which receive honour one of another?” (John 5:44). At Berkeley I put too much religion into my teaching; one young man came to me with a delicate problem—his parents, he said, had been careful to give him the most proper and respectable education available, and now he was going to have to break the painful news to them—that he had discovered that there is a God. How could he do it gently?

Along with teaching I sweated for a year at Egyptian and Coptic with a very able and eager young professor. The Coptic would be useful, but Egyptian? At my age? As soon as I got back to Provo I found out. People in Salt Lake were preaching around that Joseph Smith’s fatal mistake was to commit himself on matters Egyptian—safe enough in his own day, but now that Egyptian could be read it was a trap from which there was no escape. This pressure kept me at Egyptian, in which I was still far from competent, but gradually it began to appear that it was really the experts who, by their premature commitments, were getting themselves into a trap. A trip to Jordan in 1964 cooled me somewhat toward the Arabs and turned me more than ever to the Scrolls. Then in 1966 I studied more Egyptian in Chicago, thanks to the kind indulgence of Professors Baer and Wilson, but still wondered if it was worth all the fuss. When lo, in the following year came some of the original Joseph Smith Papyri into the hands of the Church, our own people saw in them only a useful public relations gimmick, but for the opposition they offered the perfect means of demolishing Smith once and for all. Not yet confident in Egyptian, I frankly skirmished and sparred for time, making the most of those sources which support the Book of Abraham from another side, the recent and growing writings, ancient and modern, about the forgotten legends and traditions of Abraham; they match the Joseph Smith version very closely.

The 1970s

The reading of the Abraham apocrypha inevitably led to Enoch documents and the discovery that Joseph Smith had given us, among other things, a perfectly good book of Enoch which rang up an astonishing number of stunning parallels when I started to compare it with the growing catalogue of newly discovered Enoch manuscripts. But my obsession of the 1970s has been the temple.

The essential information for solving almost any problem or answering almost any question is all brought together in the scriptures, but it is not put together for us there. Learned divines for sixty generations have argued about that, and the vast bulk of their writings is eloquent witness to their perplexity. And this is where the temple comes in. Without the temple any civilization is an empty shell, a structure of custom and convenience only. The churchmen, posing with too much dexterity to accommodate their teachings to the scientific and moral tenets of the hour, present a woeful commentary on the claims of religion to be the sheet anchor of civilization and morality. Where is the unshakable rock, the eben shetiyah? It is the temple.

Five days a week between three and four o’clock in the morning, hundreds of elderly people along the Wasatch Front bestir themselves to go up and begin their long hours of work in the temple, where they are ready to greet the first comers at 5:30 a.m. At that time, long before daylight, the place is packed; you can’t get in, so I virtuously wait until later, much later, in the day. Whatever they may be up to, here is a band of mortals who are actually engaged in doing something which has not their own comfort, convenience, or profit as its object. Here at last is a phenomenon that commands respect in our day and could safely be put forth among the few valid arguments we have to induce the Deity to spare the human race: thousands of men and women putting themselves out for no ulterior motive. There is a touch of true nobility here. What draws them to the temple? There is no music, pageantry, or socializing to beguile the time; none of us begins to grasp the full significance of what is going on, yet nobody seems bored. Why is that? I can only speak for myself, harking back to the subject of hints, those countless impulses with which our receptors are being bombarded by day and night. For thousands of years the stars have gone on sending us their hints, broadcasting unlimited information if we only knew it; now at last we are reacting to a narrow band of the informational spectrum, putting clues together in a way the ancients never did. But also we are beginning to suspect that there were times when the ancients reacted to another band of the spectrum which is completely lost on us. The temple, as the very name proclaims, is a place where one takes one’s bearings on the universe. What goes on there is confidential and must remain so until both the Mormons and the outside world are in a better position to understand it. Meanwhile, I write this almost fifty years to the day since the bewildering experience of my own endowment; I have just returned from the temple again where this day I made a most surprising and gratifying discovery. If I went to the temple five times and nothing happened, I would stop going. But I’ve gone hundreds of times, and the high hopes of new knowledge with which I go up the hill every week are never disappointed.

Since a highly competent young man has become the director of Ancient Studies, the BYU campus has been visited by a dozen or so top authorities in biblical and related studies. Though they are far ahead of me, they are nonetheless schoolmen like myself, and it is only fair to let the ingenuous reader know that we are for the most part simply conscientious grinds who got good grades and stayed on at school, moving into departmental slots conveniently vacated by the death of older (and usually better) scholars; then traveling all over to exchange commonplaces and read papers with our peers abroad in the world. As to research, we paw over large deposits of neglected material until we find something that nobody has noticed for a long time; then we write about it, and that is a contribution. The discovery of new documents has turned scholarship to translating again, which is too bad, because translating is the last resort of the resourceless mind—anybody can do it, and nobody can be expected to do it perfectly. Today, as ever, to be a diligent tabulator keeping well within party guidelines is what passes as scholarly integrity. What can I say when we cautious, mincing souls, who consider ourselves illustrious if we can come up with an idea or two in thirty years, presume to take the measure of Joseph Smith?

At the present moment the hints and clues are pouring in from all sides with the accelerating tempo of a Geiger counter gone mad, and the interpretation thereof is as certain as it is disturbing: good news for those who wait with the saints, disturbing news for all the rest. Grandma was right.

Part 2

Interviews

3

Hugh Nibley: The Faithful Scholar

Originally entitled “Nibley the Scholar,” this previously unpublished manuscript is an interview conducted by Louis Midgley at a BYU forum assembly on 21 May 1974.

Midgley: Well, that was a short introduction. What do you think of long introductions?

Nibley: They’re depressing. The Lord said, “How can they believe who receive honor from one another” (John 5:44, author’s translation). Remember the talks about the Pharisees who love the greetings in the marketplace and the high seats at the banquets and the Rabbi this, Rabbi that, and so forth. Cicero puts it (manus) manum lavat. One hand rubs the other; “you pat my back, I’ll pat yours.” This is not good.

Midgley: This is everything you wanted to know about and from Hugh Nibley, but were afraid to ask, or couldn’t get answered when you asked it.

Hugh, you have a reputation for being a hard man to question. Now my observation is that most questions go unanswered because they are poor questions. I hope I don’t have that problem today or that you don’t want to answer them. Now I think Brother Nibley has been preparing for this for a lifetime. He has the answers. My job is to find the right questions. Fortunately, I think the answers will come whether I have the questions or not.

Now a number of cultural Mormons have told me over a number of years something like this: Hugh Nibley is not serious about the gospel; he’s just playing a game. Is this true?

Nibley: Well, you seem to be playing a game if you are serious about the gospel. Joseph Smith is a good example of that. He spoke with angels, he saw the Father and the Son. Well, after that how could he take the visiting firemen seriously. They always referred to him as the merry prophet and he sometimes even offended them. And you know he tells us that this was the one thing of which he was guilty in his youth. He was too light-minded. He was prone, he said, to laugh and joke about things, and it offended lots of people who thought they should be taken more seriously. And people visiting the Prophet were sometimes rather upset. So I say, if you had seen a vision of the eternities (I have not), how can you take these other people seriously? No, it is man’s situation (and my situation) that is much too serious to be joked about. I would like to be all fun and games, but certain questions must be answered first.

It is like a person who goes to the doctor to have a checkup. It turns out he has a terminal disease, which is going to terminate very soon. Well, you see, it is how that question is answered. But once you have that answer and it is a good one, then you are free to rejoice, let down your hair, and have some fun. The Saints did that anciently because they felt the important questions were solved. The terror that faces us, all of us, the questions the world cannot answer— while such questions remain unanswered, “Our sincerest laughter/With some pain is fraught;/Our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought.”1 This is the theme of literature: “But men at whiles are sober / And think by fits and starts,/And if they think, they fasten/Their hands upon their hearts.”2 We think about it. But we don’t have to do that, so we can be rather relaxed and gay about these things once we know the answer, once we have our testimonies. So to these people, I say, “My, you don’t take these things with sufficient seriousness.” Oh, I am being serious all right.

There is a very interesting passage in the Clementine Recognitions where Peter is arguing with Simon Magus. Simon Magus is the great brain of the times, and Simon says something. Peter cannot help it—he has been trying to keep from laughing, but finally he bursts out laughing and says, “No, I am not taking myself seriously either. I take the gospel seriously, you take yourself seriously, and that makes the difference. I can’t take you or myself seriously.” And this is so. If you take yourself seriously, you won’t take the gospel seriously and the other way around. If you take the gospel seriously, then you will say, “Now I know that man is nothing” (see Alma 26:12 and Moses 1:10). Man is a nothing. Oh, the nothingness of man. We can joke about ourselves once we take the gospel seriously and once we know its blessings and promises. Then we can relax and breathe easily and have some fun, which I don’t do enough of.

Midgley: Why all the busy activities you are engaged in—books, essays, lectures, sermons? Whom are you trying to impress?

Nibley: I am trying to impress my Heavenly Father. And it is not easy, I have discovered. I am much too old to try to impress anybody else. I am not going anywhere. Promoted to what, for heaven’s sake—dog catcher? No, the only person you try to impress is your Heavenly Father, and it is awfully hard because he can’t be fooled—not for a minute. I have always felt driven this way. The gospel is so wonderful. There is so much to find out. It opens the doors to so many things. It is sort of an obsession, a sort of personal thing. As long as you are going to be doing something, why not be doing something that hasn’t been done before. There is a lot to be done, and all this stuff has to be turned over. It is very exciting—I mean the stuff that lies before us that is untouched. This is it—we have not begun to touch the possibilities of the gospel.

That reminds me of something here, just some random stuff. But a great authority on the brain says that the extent of man’s potential is awe inspiring. We seem to have acquired abilities so far beyond even our present dramatic needs that we look top-heavy. (He’s talking about evolution, but that doesn’t explain the fact that we have ten thousand times the intelligence we need to survive. Stupider creatures have a better chance of surviving actually.) Well, he goes on—nature has gone to some trouble to equip us with an enormous cerebral cortex of seemingly unlimited capacity. What was the hurry? We could have got on with much less. At the moment we are like a small family of squatters who has taken over a vast palace but finds no need to move beyond the comfortable service apartment in one corner of the basement. We have not begun to use our potential, and this is what we are all guilty of. And so let us try to get out of the broom closet and see what is there while we have a little time here, because the Lord requires that of us. He has given us these capabilities. Sure, Hamlet says, “He that made us with such large discourse, Looking before and after, gave us not That capability and god-like reason to fust in us unused.”3 Of course, we don’t use it. As a man says here, “We don’t begin to use anything, so it is a great game; let us find out what is there before it is too late.”

Midgley: Well, I have heard it said that if we have the gospel we don’t really need to think. Do you agree with that?

Nibley: You know perfectly well that I agree with Brigham Young’s concept. He was always after that. Joseph Smith uses the expression “the expanding mind.” We must expand our minds constantly. This is what the gospel does. All eternity is open before us and we start here. The Lord wants the bridge-head design to begin here with us on a modest scale, but we must look and move in that direction; that is what we are working on here. And we are not limited here; we are supposed to seek after these things, but we don’t need to quote the well-known passages about seeking wisdom in all the best books and so forth. No, we are stuck with that.

Midgley: I have frequently said, quoting someone else— and I believe it—that the “gospel is one of the best-kept secrets in the Church.”4 Could you tell us what the gospel means to you? Give us some principles.

Nibley: Yes, it is very clear. The gospel is one long shout of hallelujah. As the Book of Mormon says, “Remember O my son, these things are real” (see Mosiah 1:6–7; Alma 37:13–14, 32, 35; Helaman 5:9, 12). Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947), who was a great scientist and mathematician as you know, said on his deathbed, “There are only two things that survive—one is the Bible and one is Plato.” And he said, “It is because of the sense of possibilities that are there, and these possibilities are real. All sorts of marvelous things are possible. We must not stoop down and bind ourselves in with our saucy doubts and fears in order to defend ourselves against facing the great things beyond. We must not surround ourselves with everyday busy work, which really doesn’t need to be done.”5 No, the gospel is the reason for our being here.

The Egyptians have a saying, “Man, thy existence is a miracle compared with which all other existences are nothing.” Last night I was reading a brand new book, only a month old, on astronomy—it is the new angle. It is on the dark holes and the pulsars and all that sort of thing. The thing that impressed me so much about that was that there was no place in this system for us to be here—there was no place for us.

The same thing happens in the biological system. Let me quote a biologist on that (I just happen to have the right quotations, you know, because these things happen to be interesting) where he tells us, “Left to itself [these are basic rules you see, we will come back to the gospel in a second], everything tends to become more and more disorderly, until the final and natural state of things is a completely random distribution of matter. [Of course, that is your second law and so forth—your heat death, entropy.] Any kind of order is unnatural and happens only by chance encounters [that reverse the general trend]. These events are statistically unlikely and the further combination of molecules into anything as highly organized as a living organism is wildly improbable. Life is a rare and unreasonable thing.”6 Seen from the point of view of the biologist, just as from the point of view of the astronomer, we have no business being here. Here he says, “Life occurs by chance and the probability of its occurring and continuing is infinitesimal.”7 With over a million forms of life on earth, to believe that this took place only by chance places a great strain on the credulity of even the most mechanistic biologist.

But the cosmos itself is patternless, being a jumble of random and disordered events. We have no business being here, as a biologist remarked.8 It is not just against probability—it is wildly improbable. It is absurd, yet here we are. Now the fact that we are here is quite a marvelous thing. There is no place in the universe for us, but here we are and we are participating in a drama—in a play. The play is not going to make any sense unless you know how it begins and ends. If you go into a movie late, you know, even if you are three minutes late, you say, “Well, what goes on here?” Or if you are called away early, you ask your friend the next day. He says, “How did you like the play?” “I don’t know. I didn’t see how it ended.” You must know how it ends, and you must know how it begins; otherwise, the play is going to be meaningless. Well, you are in the play. You come in the beginning of the play. It has been going on for thousands of years before you get here and even before you get to find out what it is about, you have to leave the theater. So you stand on the stage and say, “Well, what is going on? What am I supposed to do?” And the person next to you says, “I don’t know. I have not been here much longer than you have.” But the worst of it is you are in the play. You have to take some meaningful part. Well, what am I supposed to do? This is what they call a protology—how the thing began; and eschatology—how it is going to end. This is what makes the play.

Protology is being used now by some scholars. So many of the early Christian documents deal with this. The vast majority of material coming out now deals with preexistence and postexistence. Without this the play makes no sense. The gospel supplies us with this knowledge, and only the gospel does. Without this, it is a “tale told by an idiot, . . . signifying nothing,” and so forth.9 The gospel tells us how the story begins and how it ends, and without that you are helpless. You are distracted. Nothing means anything, so here we are.

Joseph Smith started out telling us about the preexistence, and Brigham Young said that doctrine offended more Latter-day Saints than any other teaching. More people were tested and tried and left the Church because of the doctrine of preexistence than any other teaching, including polygamy or anything else. And today we take it in stride. The world says now in the view of what is coming out, what could be more natural? You have got to have that part of the picture. But you see this is it. I find myself on the stage, but what am I supposed to be doing?

The gospel is the only chance of getting an answer. It will give meaning to what we do. Without it there will be no meaning, I assure you. You can quote plenty of poets and philosophers on this. Let me quote one right here. Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) is an example of where you are without the gospel. Here was a very devout, a very profound searching man, and so forth. “All the labors of the ages, all the devotion, all the inspiration, all the noonday brightness of human genius, are destined to extinction in the vast death of the solar system, and that the whole temple of man’s achievement must inevitably be buried beneath the debris of a universe in ruins—all these things, if not quite beyond dispute, are yet so nearly certain that no philosophy which rejects them can hope to stand.”10 Shakespeare says in his last play, Remember, “these our actors . . . were all spirits, and Are melted into air, into thin air: And, like the baseless fabric of this vision, The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces, The solemn temples, the great globe itself, Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve And, like this insubstantial pageant faded, Leave not a rack behind.”11 So Shakespeare’s last words were “It is all going away. It is all just a play and it won’t even leave a wisp of cloud to show that it was ever there.” See, this is where you stand without the gospel. The greatest philosophers of them all—including Shakespeare— come to the same conclusion. It is too tragic for words.

Midgley: What book or books have influenced you the most?

Nibley: Well, actually the scriptures. And I do like Shakespeare, things like Homer’s Odyssey, and so forth.12 All those sorts of books—you can go on naming them. The one I happen to be reading, of course, is the important one. Right now it is some Egyptian writings that show amazing insight into things.

Midgley: You seem to have a feeling of a special calling or vocation.

Nibley: Well, we all have that, of course. Coming into this world, it is our privilege to have that. This was the chance of a lifetime—the chance to have a lifetime. In coming here, we all have our vocation, as the Prophet Joseph said. And we were ordained for that office before we came here. We should be ready and willing to accept the office and callings when we come here. Again our time will not be wasted if we do that. But in the gospel we all have our vocation here, not only as fathers of our children but as fathers of our Heavenly Father’s children. But you see how all this comes together in the temple. Here we get the protology and the eschatology, why we are here, and the different phases we have to go through. We also get the calling that each one of us has, which is a very important thing. We all have this.

Midgley: You have written about the prophetic warnings in the Book of Mormon and you have spoken about something called the “Nephite disease.” Is that a threat to the Saints now?

Nibley: Well, now, it always is. Brigham Young said, “Nobody ever heard me say I was saved. I don’t know whether I am or not. As long as I am in the flesh I am capable of committing all sorts of sins. I don’t know whether I will be true and faithful to the end. You won’t ever catch me saying that because that is the point of the test here. You don’t reach the point where you are beyond falling because that is the value of our being tested here.” We fall into that sort of thing, the vanities of this world and so forth. We are in constant danger and there is a constant threat of being overtaken by the things of this world. And as a matter of fact, the further we go the more sorely we are tempted. Look at the case of Peter. And this is another thing Brigham said, you should pray that you would never have a vision or revelation because the test is so much more severe after that—you can’t imagine what it would be like. No, it was Joseph Smith in the discourses that said that, yes. Don’t ask for a lot of visions and revelations because then you will be in real trouble. Have you noticed what happened to the apostles? Notice what happened to those who were around Joseph Smith in Kirtland. They were the ones who were tested, and all but four of them fell. They turned against Joseph, every one of them, at one time or another. They were subjected to much severer tests than other people. And we have to watch out for that.

Midgley: What about race? Is the Church racist?

Nibley: No. You know, of course, it is not racist. We have our various privileges and callings and our various offices to fulfill. And nothing is being denied anybody. They are not being held responsible for things. Well, I myself have never held any office in the Church. And what about being denied the priesthood? What does Brigham Young call the priesthood? He says it is an onerous duty.13 It is a hard thing. If we fail then we run a much greater risk. It would be a great blessing—a far greater blessing—to join the women and children in not having that responsibility. And how many of us take advantage of our priesthood and do not bring condemnation upon us. Remember Jesus tells us that “Many [are] called, but few are chosen. [He means called to the priesthood.] And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world” (D&C 121:34–35). So if you consider the priesthood, it is better not to have it. You won’t lose anything if you don’t. Because it is only a task—an onerous burden, things that have to be done. You get no glory out of it here, because only your Heavenly Father knows if you have earned it and what that glory is. And as soon as you start—remember the Lord tells us this—as soon as you start taking credit for it, amen: “Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man” (D&C 121:37). We can’t abuse it. It has to be exercised with humility and nobody knows who gets the real prize.

Midgley: Some of your friends and enemies have labeled you a devout conservative. I have always thought of you as quite liberal. Am I right? Second question: What do you think of such labels?

Nibley: Well, you are liberal in one thing and conservative in another (for example, wanting to conserve things). No, I think the question is if you want to be liberal about such things. Why not? Let us pass on that question.

Midgley: Are you a party man?

Nibley: No, I am not a party man. I am constantly reprimanded for splitting tickets and doing things like that.

Midgley: What do you think of the identification of the gospel with political ideologies?

Nibley: Let me see; there was a statement of Joseph Smith here. I knew that being a political scientist you would bring something up like that. Joseph says here, “Man departed from the first teachings, or instructions which he received from heaven in the first age, and refused by his disobedience to be governed by them. Consequently, he formed such laws as best suited his own mind.”14 And God said, “Well, we’ll make the best of that then. We’ll have to.” But it is not the laws he wants to give us. See, this is the point. “Though man . . . would not admit the influence of a power superior to his own, yet . . . God has instructed man to form wise and wholesome laws [it is a second best—doing the best you can; this is the Prophet Joseph talking], since he had departed from Him and refused to be governed by those laws which God had given by His own voice from on high. . . . But that man was not able himself to erect a system, or plan with power sufficient to free him from a destruction which awaited him, is evident from the fact that God, as before remarked, prepared a sacrifice in the gift of His own Son,” and so forth.15 They aren’t the same thing at all. You only have to look about you to realize that the gospel is one thing and this is another. It is reasonable to suppose that man departed from the first teachings and instructions and refused by his disobedience to be governed by them. He formed laws as best suited to his own mind. And though man won’t admit that, it is a second best—it is a poor second best.

Midgley: Do you think the gospel gives answers to such questions as, Should there be a graduated federal income tax? or Should we have public education or social security? or partisan questions like that?

Nibley: Yes, it answers them by saying if and when you have a celestial order those questions would be answered. You wouldn’t bother about them—they wouldn’t exist. But as things are at present, it is a case of making do with the second best. But doing that is not the gospel, and the Lord has told us that these things exist—as we just read from the Prophet Joseph—because man refused to be governed by God. As God might say, “Well, I will give you the best I can, being your kind Heavenly Father. I will help you along the best way I can, and as you are able to adapt yourselves to better things, we will do that.” But we are never going to achieve it through earthly governments; I am sure of that. Joseph had some remarkable things to say on that.

“A moment’s candid reflection upon the principles of these systems . . . is sufficient for every candid man to draw a conclusion in his own mind whether this is the order of heaven or not. We deem it a just principle . . . that all men are created equal, and that all have the privilege of thinking for themselves upon all matters relative to conscience. Consequently, then, we are not disposed, had we the power, to deprive anyone of the exercising that free independence of mind which heaven has so graciously bestowed upon the human family as one of its choicest gifts.”16 So he gives us a choice—he gives us his plan and he gives us agency—then we go from there. As our kind Heavenly Father, he says, “All right, do the best you can, and I will try to help you there.” But it is not the plan he has given us. Of course, our way is a different thing entirely.

Midgley: Is it our lot to do or die, but never ask why? Or in the Church should we ask why and expect to receive an answer?

Nibley: Well, we ask that of our Heavenly Father. You have a perfect right to do that any time you want. You go to him. The Church is very large now. People can’t be running up to the president all the time, with millions of people in the Church. That is out of the question. Well, what do you do? Every man has to receive revelation for himself, and this is very important. One of the grandest principles of the gospel is that every man receives his own revelation. There are some good quotations from Joseph Smith on that.

Midgley: Are doubts or questions wrong?

Nibley: You take every instance in which people ask the questions, and they are the ones who are particularly blessed. Like the brother of Jared or Moses or Abraham. And Moses, remember, says in the Book of Moses, “I will refuse to be comforted” (Moses 7:44). He breaks down; he just doesn’t understand it. And Abraham is the same way.

They really question, and the Lord blesses them for that. He blesses them and shows them the way. You do find these cases in which the man almost rebels, but the Lord always welcomes that. The same thing is true of Abraham.

Midgley: Cultural Mormons are sometimes embarrassed by or anxious about the temple. The endowment, they say, is an affront to intelligence—a relic of a primitive past, a copy of a social club initiation, and so on. Is the temple relevant or real?

Nibley: I don’t know where you got that stuff. Of course, that is the subject of my book that is coming out now on the temple. It is a long book and it deals with Joseph Smith, papyri, and things like that.17 No, the temple, of course, is the great thing. It is really something, and it is being discovered—I mean the temple is being discovered by outsiders. It is one of the most marvelous things there is. Don’t get me started on that, though.

Midgley: One cultural Mormon has accused you of manifesting one of the strongest crank ideas ever held by Mormons—that is, that truths can be found by reading old books and by concerning oneself with the past.18 What would you say in reply to that?

Nibley: That is an interesting thing. The only way we have of capturing the past is in the writings. Of course, the Lord has given us these documents. The writing is quite . . .

Midgley: But they insist that this is a false notion to think that something really important is to be found by reading old Egyptian documents. What could Egyptians have known that is important?

Nibley: You have to read them, and then you will find out what the Egyptians knew that is important. And it is very important to realize that this is so. No, a great deal is being discovered right now. The whole thing is being completely revolutionized today—the whole picture of what they had and so forth. It really is quite a marvelous thing. Now the Prophet Joseph is right in there. You will have to read the book that is coming out. It is a long one, but it is going to be good.

Midgley: What method do you use in doing historical research?

Nibley: Oh, I have always followed the same method, ever since I was a little kid. You follow a cycle; there are certain cultural areas that have to be covered. Originally it was from classical learning, you see, then early European, Anglo-Saxon, and European literature and then modern. And then, of course, I had to add the Oriental when I was in college. And you read in this cycle. And you have to follow a regular system. I have followed that system for years and years.

Midgley: Do you read randomly?

Nibley: No, no. Right now I have a two-day system. You have to go in a cycle because otherwise you would be so fascinated you would get stuck in one place or period and then you would just stay with it. But read in a cycle. I take just a two-day cycle now. Two days of Egyptian and two days, Babylonian; two days, Greek; and then you go right on the cycle and then you come back again so you cover things and keep sort of a balance. That is sort of a crank way of doing it. But I have to keep these things in mind all at once. You become a specialist in one area, and the picture changes. It is very important to do this.

Midgley: Why are you interested in patterns in history?

Nibley: Because everything falls into these patterns. This is the interesting thing now, you see. We didn’t think that before; but beginning with Thomas Henry Buckle in the middle of the last century, he began to show that history does fall into definite patterns. We also have these patterns to follow.

Midgley: Is having a bias an intellectual sin?

Nibley: You can’t escape bias. You have to have it. We all have that. Of course, we could develop that idea.

Midgley: But don’t we end up proving what we want to prove and neglecting everything else?

Nibley: No, you don’t, not if you have been checked enough from outside. If I were to confine my attention to my classes or things like that, I would not be checked. But if you have to, you will stick your neck out and go out and talk to other people about it too. I do this with the boys from the University of Utah all the time. Well, you have to do that, if there is going to be any balance. Sure, you don’t just carry on your own show.

Midgley: What do you think of so-called experts or authorities? Is there such a thing as an expert?

Nibley: No, there is not. But a person who has read a lot about certain things and deals with certain things might be called an expert. I am no expert. That is why I have to keep quoting documents all the time and let them speak for me, because I don’t know any of this stuff.

Midgley: Missionaries go out and return and enter into sales careers—selling insurance and the like—or they turn to business, the stock market; they become ambitious, they become successful, and we applaud them. Do you?

Nibley: Why sure. They succeed in their particular line.

Midgley: What do you think of the gospel of success?

Nibley: I guess there is nothing wrong with it. You talk about the ancient patriarchs—Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and so forth—they are measured in terms of success. But, of course, all this is as the Prophet Joseph Smith says, “All this is as nothing—not a drop in the bucket—compared with the eternities.”

Midgley: Is the gospel intended to somehow equip us to do the things the world wants to do better than it can?

Nibley: Sure. We have to if we are to establish Zion. That is what we have to do. We do these things very well. Midgley: How does the gospel relate to our contemporary middle-class culture or value system?

Nibley: Oh, boy. . . . No, the purpose of the gospel is to bring again the kingdom of God. And this is a very different thing. We could get warmed up on that question, but I am not going to.

Midgley: Many of the Saints are concerned about the wickedness of others. For example, they are angry at the Communists or some political party or the bankers or the blacks. What do you think of such a policy?

Nibley: Well, the gospel has set this all for us. We have the scriptures to follow, and they will give us the answer to everything. Those who are obedient are blessed, and they enjoy the blessings and the promises. We must righteously fulfill our parts to receive our blessings.

Midgley: Is our concern with the wickedness of others a sign of anything in our own spiritual life?

Nibley: Why, sure, it is bound to be.

Midgley: What do you think of the future of Church education or BYU?

Nibley: Well, I think the Lord has great plans in mind. I think he has great things for us here. Many revelations are going to come forth and means are going to be opened. We are going to have knowledge given to us that we have never had before. I think these things are going to be made available. The keys are being supplied now. And personnel is being formed, you might say, is being drafted or volunteered.

Midgley: Is every opinion of a General Authority a revelation?

Nibley: Well, not necessarily. They can have their own opinions, as the Prophet Joseph says, and the same thing with Brigham Young.

Midgley: How do you know when it is?

Nibley: Well, you know for yourself. It is given for every man to know for himself. And that is why we have the gospel. “Man shall know for himself” is the formula.

Midgley: There seem to be obstacles in the way of the testimony of many young Latter-day Saints. They are put off by what they see; at least they sometimes tell me that they are troubled by the triviality of the things we do, or by our stupidity, or by our ignorance, or sometimes by wicked and dishonest men. Can a testimony survive that?

Nibley: Of course, it can. Faith has nothing to do with that. A testimony comes direct to you from your Heavenly Father. None of that makes the slightest bit of difference. If the clock doesn’t tell the right time, it doesn’t weaken my testimony at all.

Midgley: Are you concerned with the leadership of the Church?

Nibley: Nope, not a bit. I certainly am not. The leadership of the Church is Jesus Christ, and he knows what he is doing. Don’t worry.

Midgley: I am tempted to ask you if you would sustain Judas? Nibley: Of course I would sustain Judas. He was one of the apostles.

Midgley: But he was a devil.

Nibley: Remember what the Lord said. “I [have] chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil” (John 6:70). But he chose him. The Lord has his purposes in these things. If we sustained only perfect people, we wouldn’t sustain anybody. The Lord has his purposes in these things.

Midgley: Then you are not turned off by seeing the weaknesses of the members of the Church?

Nibley: Oh, heavens no. That should strengthen your testimony if anything. We have plenty of scripture. The Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price show us the struggles and tribulations people have had in

the past. They have not been angels by any means in the Church. Midgley: What is the threat to the Church in days of prosperity?

Nibley: The Church has always been the same. Of course that is what the Book of Mormon is about. The Book of Mormon is a challenge to the Church in the days of prosperity when we forget the Lord, which is very easy to do. But I don’t think we will forget him now. We are too dependent on him. We are skating too close to the edge here.

Midgley: Can our enemies prove the gospel false?

Nibley: No.

Midgley: Can we prove it true?

Nibley: No, not if they don’t want to hear it. As the scripture says, “though an angel from heaven told them, they would not believe” (see Galatians 1:8). So they don’t have to believe. They are under no obligation to. If they do, it is because they are led by the Spirit. It is because they received a testimony. There is no scheme or plan or trick by which we can force people to believe the gospel; otherwise, it wouldn’t be the gospel of salvation.

Midgley: Should we be trying to establish arguments for the gospel?

Nibley: Sure, there is nothing wrong with that. We should use arguments for the gospel. “Bring forth your strong reasons,” the Lord has said (Isaiah 41:21). And we are supposed to invite the world to bring forth their strong reasons. And the Lord brings forth evidence from day to day. These things build up, of course, because it is all building to an end. It is all building up to his millennial reign upon the earth. Things do have a motion and a direction here. And we are supposed to acquire and build up and preserve what we can. And bring forth our strong reasons and let the world bring forth theirs. That is what the Lord has invited us to do.

Midgley: What is man’s dominion? You wrote recently about that.19

Nibley: By George, I should remember that. Do I remember? I don’t even remember what it was. Boy—I am pretty far gone.

Midgley: Let me ask you a question about chronology. These are questions that sometimes trouble Latter-day Saints—young Latter-day Saints. Do you agree with the Bishop of Ussher’s chronology? Was the creation 4004 B.C.?

Nibley: No, that was not true, but chronology is full of surprises. This is the point. Everything is changing on this issue all the time. And it works both ways too. Some things are much newer than we think, some things are much older than we think. But of course all time is present before the Lord. And he has divided our history into dispensations. We live in our own box, so to speak. What was going on in the other boxes is sometimes something we can’t even imagine—for example, what it would be like to live in Egypt. But we have a vast accumulation of documents today. Still, we are tested by our own standards; we have come to this world in this dispensation to be tested by questions and situations which are totally alien to other times and places, even in the time of the Prophet Joseph.

Midgley: How long did it take God to create the world?

Nibley: Oh, come on. He has all the time in the world. And remember, time is only measured by man, the Lord tells us. Of course, it is a very interesting question, time being relative and so forth. But, remember, we believe that the gospel and these things come from eternity to eternity. We are dealing with the eternities here. This is no business of checking it very carefully on the calendar, though some things are much briefer than we think, and some expand much longer than we think. The chronology is a relative sort of thing. Time is a state of mind. You know that if you have taken any drugs.

Midgley: I take it that you don’t feel that such questions are central to the gospel or really crucial to one’s testimony.

Nibley: Sure, they are relevant.

Midgley: Relevant, but not crucial.

Nibley: No, you have your own testimony.

Midgley: You don’t ultimately care then about the age of the earth and those questions?

Nibley: Well, those things are still in suspension. We have not answered them yet. And it interests me very much, but again we are dealing with a relative situation. If you had been on the earth at a particular time in the past, for example, what would you have seen? What would your state of mind be? What would it be like? Well, how can you reconstruct that? You bring together a lot of evidence as carefully as you can, and then you don’t have the vaguest idea. For example, imagine what it would be like to be in Bali today or in Newfoundland, places some people have been—but you have not. You go there and it is not like that at all. You are completely wrong about the whole thing. So we can’t reconstruct the whole picture and be dogmatic about it.

Midgley: Do you reject biological evolution?

Nibley: Well, that is an interesting question, isn’t it? It depends on how we define it. All creatures exist in their own particular spheres. And we do feel a kinship with the animals—and we should. We are going to live with them in the eternities; we should love the critters. And they should learn to love us.

Midgley: That is what you were writing about in “Man’s Dominion.”

Nibley: Yes, but then you have to go into all sorts of things when defining your evolution process—what school you are going to represent, and so forth.

Midgley: Would you say something about the religious hobbies of sectarian Mormons?

Nibley: No.

Midgley: You mean they’re not worth commenting on? Some of the presidents of the Church have warned us about religious hobbyism.

Nibley: Yes, I may be guilty of it myself. Everybody specializes in certain points. But it depends on what one means by religious hobbyism. You get on one particular thing, and everybody gets on a particular kick at a particular time. So you are writing a paper about something and that is what you are thinking about all the time. It then becomes an obsession with you. And before you know it, you are a religious hobbyist. And I could be accused of that. Everybody else could.

Midgley: Is the spirit, the intelligence of man, self-existent? Is it self-conscious and unique? That is an important question, incidentally. You mentioned the preexistence, how much an affront that was in Joseph Smith’s day.

Nibley: It was.

Midgley: All right, how would you answer that question?

Nibley: Well, in the affirmative. We don’t realize, of course, what we are. So if you knew what you were and that we come from the eternities and pass into the eternities, this is the whole thing with the gospel. It deals with the eternities.

Midgley: So there was a time when we weren’t self-conscious?

Nibley: I don’t know. At that time I wouldn’t remember. Was there ever a time you were completely unconscious? Recount what you experienced.

Midgley: Does the eighth chapter of Mormon apply to us now?

Nibley: Yes. There are only a few who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts. Yes, this is a prophecy for our own time. But it is human nature, anyway. You are always going to get this. And this is what we have to fight. We are living in two worlds at once here: our good world that we know we should belong to and the world of our vanity that we are always subsiding and sliding down into, the easier way. Yes, we are trying to walk on two tracks at once. We keep slipping all the time. It is a difficult thing.

Midgley: Mormon 8 says that we have polluted the Church because of the pride of our hearts, because we seek the praise of the world, and because we suffer the needy and the hungry and the poor and the naked to pass by and don’t even notice them (see Mormon 8:36–37).

Nibley: That is Mormon speaking of our times. We have been guilty of that at times. Well, we all are. We are not sufficiently aware of what other people are, what they think, what they do, or anything else. We have enough trouble with our own thinking. But this does apply. What the gospel does is to expand our minds—the expanding gospel and the expanding mind.

Notes

^1. Percy Shelley, “To a Skylark,” lines 88–90.

^2. A. E. Housman, Last Poems, poem X, lines 5–8.

^3. William Shakespeare, Hamlet, act 4, scene 4, lines 36–39.

^4. Midgley is actually quoting Nibley, who previously made this statement to Charles Malik, president of the United Nations General Assembly (1958–59).

^5. In several instances, Nibley is loosely paraphrasing various individuals; the basic ideas can be found in their writings.

^6. Lyall Watson, Supernature (New York: Anchor, 1973), 8.

^7. Ibid., 8.

^8. He is likely referring to George Wald of Harvard.

^9. William Shakespeare, Macbeth, act 5, scene 5, lines 27–28.

^10. Bertrand Russell, A Free Man’s Worship (Portland, ME: Mosher, 1927), 6–7.

^11. William Shakespeare, The Tempest, act 4, scene 1, lines 148–56.

^12. See Jerry Johnston, “A Legendary Passion for Books and Languages, Deseret News, 31 October 1980, for a list of some of Nibley’s favorite titles, reprinted in this volume, CWHN 17:80–82.

^13. History of the Church, 3:395. Nibley made a fuss over this in an essay entitled “The Best Possible Test,” in Temple and Cosmos, CWHN 12 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1992), 532–40.

^14. History of the Church, 2:15.

^15. Ibid.

^16. Ibid., 2:6–7.

^17. Nibley is referring to his book Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, which was published by Deseret Book in 1975. The second edition appeared as CWHN 16 in 2005.

^18. Sterling McMurrin said this of Nibley in an open letter addressed to him dated 1 November 1960 (pp. 9–10).

^19. Hugh Nibley, “Man’s Dominion,” New Era 2 (October 1972): 24–31; reprinted as “Man’s Dominion, or Subduing the Earth,” in Brother Brigham Challenges the Saints, CWHN 13 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1994), 3–22.

4

Nibliography

This interview appeared in Century II: A BYU Student Journal 1/2 (1976): 54–57; the interviewers were Janice Hirst and Scott Lewis of the Century II staff. The selected bibliography (here omitted) was prepared by Professor Louis C. Midgley. For a more current bibliography, see maxwellinstitute.byu .edu/publications/nibleybibliography.php.

Century II: When you were an undergraduate student, how did you pursue knowledge? What was your philosophy?

Nibley: I used Scaliger’s method, the method of the Renaissance scholars.

Century II: What was that method?

Nibley: You have to have as broad a field as possible and as deep a field as possible. If it’s too broad, then it’s shallow. And if it’s very deep, of course, it’s too specialized, so you have to be both broad and deep—you have to be both. To do this, you have to cover many fields, but how do you cover them all? You have to work just one at a time. This is what scholars did in the Renaissance times. Documents would come in, just discovered, from Constantinople and places like that, and the scholars would ask, “How are we going to classify them? How are we going to find out what’s in them? What are they all about?” They’d put them in piles, which is what you have to do. The best pile, of course, is by language. Then you’d arrange these piles in chronological order. Egyptian would be over here, and your Hebrew, and your Greek, and your Arabic over there, and so forth. Then you would spend a week on this pile—you can’t just spend a day, because that doesn’t get you far enough. If you had a limited number of piles, five or six, then you would start on the circle again.

Century II: Do you choose a topic?

Nibley: No, you don’t choose a topic, you choose a pile of texts. Then you arrange them in the best order you can, chronologically, in a particular language. Then you read all the Greek writers in order—that’s what I’ve been doing for years and years. Read through the Latin writers chronologically, read through the Icelandic writers chronologically, and so on. By the time you’ve gone around the circle and come back weeks later where you got started, this [pointing to an imaginary pile] has already gotten cold. So I had to do it a little faster—I had to start making a three-day cycle. I started to get impatient. I tried to make the cycle in one day. But just when you get excited, just when you get interested in something, you have to leave it to go into another field the next day, and you don’t want to do that. You have to have at least enough time to finish up. Three days will get you deep enough to leave an impression to be remembered for the next time you come around. And yet you go fast enough so that you won’t be lost. The reason you have to force yourself to move from one to another is that something gets exciting, and you must read it. Hopefully, you have to move to the next one, regardless, because you’d get stuck with one, and you’d never get off that pile.

Century II: So your philosophy about gaining knowledge is a historical approach?

Nibley: Yes, that happens to be what I am doing. It has to do with the records of the race, because what we have about the past is all we have to show for our existence—the past is all there is.

Century II: Was history your initial field of study in college?

Nibley: No. Originally, science was going to be my field. But when I was on my mission, I realized that what was being ignored completely was the documents—nobody was reading the documents. They had already been discovered—there they were. When I studied at Berkeley, Karl Popper taught all the Greek, all the Arabic, and all the Hebrew— one teacher! Today there are twenty in the department of Arabic and more than that in the department of Greek. And yet just in my time there was one teacher who took care of the whole thing because they thought it wasn’t necessary to have more. I was the only student in those classes.

Century II: Would you say, then, that these historical documents cover science?

Nibley: Well, no. But they are a part of it. As I say, there are 350,000 professional scientists in America today. There were nearly that many yesterday, but how many were studying the documents? None. At that time only three or four people were studying Egyptian. And so I said to myself, “Here is an obligation. You have to be where you are wanted. This material is just as real, just as tangible, just as scientific as what you get from fossils, stars, and chemicals. The record of the human race is just as much a document as all these other documents.” That is why I started reading the piles in that order. For a couple of years I compromised and majored in sociology, but I soon realized that the lab notes and fieldnotes of the human race are in the ancient documents. They are not in Family Weekly, where some sociologist tells us tall people tend to prefer custard to reading about submarines, or something like that. It’s completely absurd, but these correlations are made, you know. They call it being scientific, but it’s not.

Century II: So would you say that you are interpreting these things for the modern world?

Nibley: It’s the same thing as science—you try to get a picture of the world. Scholarship does that, the artist does it better, and the gifted artist does it the best. We are beginning to realize that the Cartesian ideal of breaking things down into discrete particles and measuring mathematical units will not give you the ultimate explanation. Sir Arthur Thompson, as an anthropologist, goes out and measures all the Chinese. He takes thousands of measurements, puts them all together, and you get a Chinaman. But why break it down so you can reassemble it again? What I’m saying is that the artist does not see things on the superficial level at all. He’s the person who sees the nightingale as a bird, just as much as a person who sees it as so many molecules, or breaks it down into organs. Put it together and you have a nightingale. The person who looks at that, admires it, enjoys its singing—he has the ultimate experience. He’s the scientist, not the character who tells us what kind of chemicals the nightingale secretes while it is singing. You could do that, too. They are both legitimate, but at very different levels. The best level is that of the artist.

Century II: What about the common conception of BYU as a giant-size high school instead of a really scholarly university?

Nibley: This is one thing people think of BYU, but all people have to do is go somewhere else. There’s no difference. Students at BYU are not sophisticated, and they’re not involved in these everlasting discussions and bull sessions, which themselves become a cult. Actually, students here may be dumb, but they’re not affected (“pretentious”). The condition at BYU has always been this: average very low, but individuals very high. We have the best here and there— just maybe three or four in every department. They are good enough to be better than anybody else in the world. And that is what has kept BYU going. It’s amazing what we come up with, astonishing. They could hold their own anywhere. BYU will not prevent you from learning. But it won’t make you learn anything either—you don’t have to learn anything.

Century II: What do you aim for in the writings you prepare for publication?

Nibley: Years ago when I wrote the 1957 priesthood manual, An Approach to the Book of Mormon, the committee turned down every chapter. But President McKay overruled the committee on every chapter. He said that if it’s over the brethren’s heads, let them reach for it. He left every chapter just as I had it. The committee fumed at the mouth and protested, “We can’t have it!” President McKay turned right around and said, “We jolly well can have it! Let them work at it a little.” I was a very good friend of Brother Richard L. Evans, who always used to tell me, “Always write as if you were writing to the tiredest farmer in Koosharem.” If you are writing to the tiredest farmer in Koosharem, what do you do to keep him awake? No attention span, no interest, or anything. He’s just a tired, dead farmer. If he’s the one you have to write for, you’re certainly going to lose your other audience in a hurry. I never obeyed that counsel.

5

A Conversation with Hugh Nibley

This interview, by Mary Bradford, Gary Gillum, and H. Curtis Wright, took place in the BYU library on 15 October 1979; it was published in Dialogue 12/4 (1979): 10–27.

Dialogue: Do you see yourself as a “defender of the faith”?

Nibley: Perish, forbid! I’m not that at all. I’m just another sucker like you!

Dialogue: Many people have tried to follow you around and become your disciples.

Nibley: It doesn’t work! No!

Dialogue: Are you saying that everybody needs to follow his or her own path?

Nibley: Oh, sure.

Dialogue: People tend to idolize you.

Nibley: Well, that’s silly. Ah! That is the reward for keeping out of sight. All they have to do is see me, and boy, does that disillusion them in a hurry!

Dialogue: I understand you’ve learned to ride a bicycle backwards. Is that true?

Nibley: That’s a new one. No. I don’t ride a bicycle backwards. I have a son that does tricks like that.

Dialogue: You like to cook?

Nibley: No, I detest cooking.

Dialogue: I understand you lived entirely on milk and carrots once.

Nibley: No, it wasn’t milk and carrots. It was oranges and cabbage.

Dialogue: Well, that will give you a lot of energy.

Nibley: Wait a minute! I did live on canned milk and carrots for quite a while. That’s right.

Dialogue: It was when you were working on your dissertation. You decided to change your dissertation subject after you dropped your notes on the floor, so you locked yourself in your apartment for two weeks, eating carrots and milk.

Nibley: That’s true, but it was more like four weeks.

Dialogue: And then you completed the entire process.

Nibley: See, these interviews are very bad. I’ve never yet read an interview that was correct. You just don’t realize it’s all wrong until there’s one about you. Then you realize that almost nothing is right. That’s where the myths and the gossip come from.

Dialogue: Well, there are quite a few myths about you. Have your children turned out to be scholars?

Nibley: Michael is a very good scholar; he’s really bright. Martha is a prodigy. She was a National Merit finalist. She came home at the end of last semester with forty-four trophies.

Dialogue: Is she in college now?

Nibley: No, she’s still at BY High.

Dialogue: Is she your youngest?

Nibley: No, she has a younger sister, Zina, who sometimes takes first when Martha takes second. That’s happened once, and it broke their hearts. They were crying and crying; it was terrible. “What’s the matter?” It was the big one, they were down at Baker’s school, one of these big regional speech things, you know. But Zina got first, and Martha got second. It was quite a scene. Zina was all broken up because she thought Martha was done in. Martha was feeling bad because Zina wasn’t happy about winning first prize.

Dialogue: Isn’t that amazing?

Nibley: Yes, they were both in tears because they just got the first and second prizes, that was all, but not in the right order.

Dialogue: Is your wife, Phyllis, a musician?

Nibley: Yes, she’s still in the orchestra. She still plays the cello. She’s also the librarian for the orchestra—has to get all that music ordered from the East, copied, distributed, put on the stands, and then get it collected. The musicians like to take it home and practice. She has to get it back. It’s only rented, you know.

Dialogue: One thing you’re noted for is your sense of humor. It seems to us that humor is really basic. Nibley: Certainly, that gives us some of the best defenses we have.

Dialogue: Do you feel that you were strictly brought up?

Nibley: No, not particularly.

Dialogue: What do you think accounts for your family’s many accomplishments? Nibley: Oh, my mother was hell on wheels. She pushed her kids.

Dialogue: I know your brother, Reid Nibley, the pianist . . .

Nibley: She pushed him too. Oh, how he hated practicing when he was a little boy!

Dialogue: You know many languages. What is the secret of being able to learn all those languages?

Nibley: Well, all you have to do is just live in the country, that’s all. Nabokov segmented his life, the first part in Russia, then lived a while in Berlin, France, the United States, at least fifteen years in each country.

Dialogue: A woman called the other day to ask, “Can you tell me how many languages Brother Nibley knows?” She said, “I heard it was twenty-five, but I don’t know.”

Nibley: No, no!

Dialogue: How is your research on the Book of Abraham? We understand you’re still working on it.

Nibley: Well, my book is up at Deseret Book.1 They’ve had it for a couple of months now. They’re waiting until after conference. Everything has had to wait for conference. Did you ever see anything like it? Every other page of the newspapers was just plastered with book ads.

Dialogue: Is that right?

Nibley: Oh, you never saw the like! I mean, it was shocking, talk about the big push. There’s nothing more venal on earth than a publisher. They get something for nothing; they take all their expenses and then divide it by the number of books they are going to get out, and that gives the cost of each book—total expenses divided by the number of books. Then they multiply that by eight, and that’s the price of the book. Really, that’s the normal procedure. They multiply their costs by eight, and that’s what you get.

Dialogue: Now that you’ve finished your book on the Book of Abraham, what are you working on?

Nibley: I have a couple of projects now, but one is top secret!

Dialogue: Is it your magnum opus?

Nibley: No.

Dialogue: What do you think of the Orson Hyde Memorial in Israel?

Nibley: You know, we have never found the slightest trace of Jewish blood in the Orson Hyde line. He is in no way related to the Jews, and they emphasize that he is Jewish. My great-grandfather, Alexander Neibaur, was a Jew, very much a Jew. The genealogists really went all out on Orson Hyde and couldn’t find any connection with the Jews anywhere.

Dialogue: Well, we’ve never heard that before—that’s fascinating. So it’s just a myth?

Nibley: Well, I don’t know. There must be something behind it. What is the blood of Israel, after all? We’re all adopted into the covenant. And he was the one who did go back there, and he did give the blessing, of course. If we are of Ephraim, who cares? It doesn’t make any difference to us, as far as that goes.

Dialogue: Do you think it was a good thing for us to have that plaque in honor of the Jews, considering the Mideast situation?2

Nibley: Yes. The scriptures talk about the prophecies and the Jews in the early days back there, and boy, they hit it right on the head. Some good things then. They had a very clear idea of exactly how it would be with the Jews and the people over here. The double action, the “one-two” business.

Dialogue: We want to ask about the Ebla tablets. They sound exciting.

Nibley: They’re great! Dahoud was here from the Pontifical Institute. He is head of the Oriental Department. We had a long talk with him—it was very interesting.

Dialogue: Those were some of the earliest mentions of the creation?

Nibley: Not the creation, but mention of names like Abraham, first mention of David and Adam and Eve, the first mention we find of “Eve” occurring outside the Old Testament. And so it goes. It’s quite exciting. But they have just begun, now, and there are all sorts of differences about this thing.

Dialogue: So you’ll be working with Dahoud?

Nibley: No. In fact, I’m writing a letter here turning them down; they want me to work with them on the new encyclopedia. I’ve always been working on that from here. But I can’t get sidetracked on that.

Dialogue: Do you think that our country and maybe even the Church could be losing out for not doing as much research in parapsychology as they are in the Soviet Union, maybe trying to correlate it with the gospel?

Nibley: Well, it’s true that American schools and institutes shut a lot of doors. They’re very dogmatic about certain things. Chicago is a good example of that. They will not credit the Egyptians with anything; because Egyptians lived back in primitive times, they can’t know as much as we do. And so it’s just so much mumbo jumbo, and with that attitude they won’t find anything at all. The Chicago School, with people like Breasted and Erman couldn’t stand the French because the French hadn’t used intuition when they were translating. And yet now, after a hundred years, the French translations are much better. But the Germans— Prussian arrogance, you know—weren’t wissenschaftlich; they weren’t scientific about it. The two words they could not stand and would drive them wild were romantic and fantasy. If you didn’t use their method, you were guilty of Romantik or Fantasie.

Dialogue: That’s strange. The Germans have such a long history of romanticism in their literature and history.

Nibley: Well, that’s true. But again, they have such a long tradition of humanism and liberalism, too—such extremes!

Dialogue: Is that why the gospel isn’t being preached very successfully in Germany right now?

Nibley: Yes, that’s true. They were all romantics, extreme romantics. After all, Hitler was as superstitious, as star-bound as anyone.

Dialogue: Do you see great scientists as having a sense of mystery?

Nibley: They always did, but they tell us, according to all the surveys today, there aren’t very many great scientists left. It was a toss-up with the Nobel, as far as that goes, you see. It’s just some very tiny segment. That’s why I think Weinberg probably deserved it because he took a broader view of things. I thought that the survey the Saturday Review made two years ago was interesting. They interviewed physicists, asking them, first of all, who are the giants in your field? And the answer was, “Well, if you had come around ten years ago, we could have told you: Niels Bohr, Einstein,” and so forth. “But we don’t have any giants.” It’s interesting; they went to every other field, into literature and into music. There are no giants; it’s an age of pygmies, an exhausted age. Technology may have crippled us.

Dialogue: Of all the people who may have brought truth into the world in this century, who do you think has brought the most (besides Church leaders, that is)?

Nibley: In this century? That’s an interesting question. I wouldn’t say Rex Stout. He’s been a great revelator. (Laughs.) His stuff puts you in the picture and makes you feel the spirit. In this century you’re expected to say Einstein. Who besides Einstein?

Dialogue: What about Bucky Fuller?

Nibley: I think he hasn’t brought new knowledge into the world, but he has pointed it out.

Dialogue: Synthesized?

Nibley: He has called attention to certain things, and that’s very important; we’ve been looking in the other direction. I have a feeling this century’s getting along now, and that’s quite a span. I’d forgotten about that. I don’t know; I’ll have to think about that. There must be somebody who’s given us something really big. I wish Nabokov hadn’t gone overboard for sex. What a master of language! Nobody can touch him in it. He had the secret of it, inimitable, that just carried you along. And yet he would get on this “organic sexuality” that was so horrible—it was incest and all sorts of things. And yet, he wrote other books with no mention of it whatever—some of his best things. Perhaps Mark Twain.

Dialogue: Yes, Mark Twain was quite a giant in his own right.

Nibley: He made an American contribution. Someone like James Joyce has a lot to offer. He was great. Poets—nobody keeps track of poets anymore.

Dialogue: They don’t seem to be coming from one central tradition.

Nibley: No, any of them could be a poet just by writing any prose piece and dividing up the lines. Two words, three words, that’s it, you can just take any letters and make them into a poem.

Dialogue: Stream of consciousness. And emphasis on speech pattern.

Nibley: Yes, well now, that isn’t creating much.

Dialogue: Do you find that most students are spending all their time studying what they already know?

Nibley: Well, that’s been characteristic of BYU all along. I mean, the students actually resent being told what they don’t know. They will come to me at the beginning of class and say, “You’re not going to tell us anything we don’t already know.” They actually do that.

Dialogue: I notice sort of a “supermarket attitude”: “We’re paying for our education, so we will take only what we want to take.”

Nibley: “You pays your money and you takes your choice.” That’s true enough. (Laughter.)

Dialogue: That’s basically what you said in “Zeal without Knowledge.”3 We notice that in literary studies: Just studying the same thing over and over again, instead of going out and creating something new and then coming back and looking at it.

Nibley: After announcing that the gospel embraces all truth. We accept truth from all sources; we accept all truth; the gospel includes all truth.

Dialogue: Do you think some students are passing on the torch, though?

Nibley: Oh, there are some good ones coming along now. I don’t know enough about it, because I’m not in it anymore, but there should be some very good students. Now let me see, oh, yes, there are. I can think of half a dozen—at least half a dozen in Egyptian and classics. They are very active in classics. We have some good students in classics, far more than ever before. Everybody else is in business and law now. That’s the thing. Nothing else counts. It’s just managers managing other managers.

Dialogue: Managing people or managing money?

Nibley: Both. And management produces nothing.

Dialogue: What about the sciences?

Nibley: Well, there’s always the science of management.

Dialogue: With all that you’ve been able to accomplish in your lifetime, is there any way that you can teach members of the Church to be self-motivated, to educate themselves?

Nibley: Well, it has always happened: Students are exposed to education. A surprisingly large percent, I think, will be affected, if they are exposed to good taste in music or art. The kids don’t forget. It will catch on.

Dialogue: So you hope that we will be able to get past the attitude that we are here to get what we already have.

Nibley: Yes.

Dialogue: Some BYU physicists and others are trying to relate the second law of thermodynamics to the atonement. They are trying to learn how the atonement might have reversed the process of entropy. Will you comment on that?

Nibley: It’s clearly stated in the Book of Mormon. I’ve known about that for years. Where it says in the Book of Mormon that the normal process of nature is to die, to crumble, and to rot, we return to dust, never to rise again. Now, that’s the law of nature. That’s how everything breaks down. Talk about mysterious forces! We don’t know what it is, but the testimony of our senses makes it clear that it works. It’s interesting that there are physicists interested in that.

Dialogue: Do you think it’s the atonement itself that causes syntropy?

Nibley: Well, atonement means “syntropy”—bringing back to its former state, restoring to its former state. You see, when something breaks down, it becomes disorganized and fractured. At one means unified again—returned to its unity, returned to its former integrity and structure. It sounds like a Latin word or Greek, but it isn’t—it’s pure Old English, nothing else. Atonement is not one of the technical terms, not even like resurrection. It is an Old English word. It’s like bless—it comes from no other language but English—woman comes from no other language but English. Lord, the word Lord—no trace of it in any other language. Isn’t that funny?

Dialogue: It’s Anglo-Saxon, the simpler term.

Nibley: Anglo-Saxon is related to all the other languages around. And yet these particular words emerge only in English.

Dialogue: Do you think that the gift of the Holy Ghost, or the priesthood power itself has any parallels in science, or do you think it will have in the future as we do more research?

Nibley: Yes, that’s the whole thing. Notice who got the Nobel Prize—Weinberg, and he’s the farthest out of all. He’s the one who’s broken down the quark.4 He’s going to get us the ultimate particle, as far as that goes. And the particle will account for everything, and we’ve gotten nowhere, but that’s exactly where the atomists began. It’s relative. Well, it doesn’t make any difference what the particle is because it resides in an ultimate little particle, and they haven’t found that. Then there were different variations of atomism, the shapes and forms of atoms, that account for it, but the point is that this particle, by its structure, will explain everything in the universe, and that’s exactly what we’re working for today. We’ll finally get the ultimate particle, says Weinberg, and then we’ll know everything. It’s like saying, “Nature does this, nature does that,” or “Evolution does this, evolution does that.” They’re just words. He says it happens because it happens. You haven’t explained anything. Well, nature did it, evolution did it; that explains it.

Dialogue: We thought evolution was a dead issue on campus, but apparently it’s not.

Nibley: Oh, heavens, no. As far as that goes, it never will be, because as long as you don’t have to define anything, you can fill a gap. That’s what Karl Popper says, it’s just a circular definition. It’s the process of natural selection, survival of the fittest. How do you know it’s the fittest? Because it survives. If the only test of fitness is survival, how do you know it was the fittest that survived? Because it survived. You’ve gone nowhere—Karl Popper’s very good on that. He really rips the tautologies.

H. Curtis Wright: I have two questions, if you want to comment on them.

Nibley: Oh, sure.

Wright: One deals with the relations between naturalism and supernaturalism, the other with the relationship between the basic realities the Saints believe in and their ways of expressing those realities theologically (in rational terms) and ritually (in dramatic terms). By “naturalism,” of course, I am not referring to the philosophical tradition known as “materialism” before Karl Marx.

Nibley: I know what you mean by naturalism.

Wright: I mean the belief that the natural order contains everything that is.

Nibley: Yes.

Wright: I refer to the belief that the natural order has no environment, that there is nothing outside of it to relate or be related to it, versus the belief that in addition to the natural order, there is a transcendent reality, another world order, distinct and separate from the natural order. These beliefs I take to be irreconcilable, because you can’t believe at the same time (a) that the natural order is all there is and (b) that there is something other than the natural order. My first question, therefore, is this: What is the impact on human history of the naturalistic and supernatural outlooks?

Nibley: Well, it completely dominates the world. You have nothing else today except the gospel. That’s why, when the Church first came out, Joseph Smith couldn’t lose—he simply couldn’t lose. The naturalists had everything going for them, and he had nothing going for him. And yet he couldn’t lose because he had a scenario. He didn’t really believe that spirit was spirit—“spirit” is their word for “essence,” you see, and that’s not physical substance. So, every time they would collide like this, nothing would come of it.

Wright: I’ve been deeply interested in your study of Sophic and Mantic because it seems to explore these matters.5 The issue of this forced union, it seems to me, is a conflict of spiritualities in which two fundamental contradictories are permanently opposed to each other. The Greeks and Romans, who go for the naturalist answers to everything, are very spiritual people. But their spirituality is naturalistic because it pertains solely to the natural order; it never transcends the temporal system of nature because they have little or no feeling for eternity in the supernatural sense.

Nibley: That’s right. That accounts for all the difference between the Greeks and the Egyptians. The Greeks got all their answers from the Egyptians but didn’t bring in the other world. And that’s the whole difference. Egyptian philosophy was actually way ahead of the Greeks, but nobody will recognize that. No, the Greeks just keep on beating their breasts and going around and around in a circle because you can never get out of the naturalistic syndrome.

Wright: That creates the closed system of science.

Nibley: Yes—it’s a closed system.

Wright: And we’re thoroughly confused by all this. That’s my perception of it, anyway. The result of mixing these Eastern and Western outlooks is a conflict of spiritualities in which we can’t decide whether we ought to be Greeks or Hebrews. We’re very ambivalent about this.

Nibley: Well, the Hebrews themselves were often naturalistic.

Wright: Yes, and some of the Greeks, at least, were supernaturalists. These distinctions are basic enough to be found among all peoples. There are, I would guess, no purely naturalistic or supernatural cultures. I have thought about this a lot, and sometimes I think the problem is too big for me. But here’s the way I handle it—and I would value your comments on this. I believe that the Saints ought to be two-game athletes. We ought to resist the strong, relentless pressure of monism, which, I take it, is simply the passionate desire of the Greeks to resolve everything at the highest abstract level. They wanted to create a single superscience for explaining everything—as you know—a knowledge system so comprehensive and so airtight that, beginning with any particular in the system, you could induce one basic premise from which all the rest of the system could be deduced.

Nibley: The one particle. If you can only discover the one final particle!

Wright: The Saints should be capable of playing two games instead of one. In order to do it, though, they must distinguish between two sets of rules. They can’t play a temporal game by eternal rules, or an eternal game by temporal rules.

Nibley: Yes, because that distinction is always made. There is the temporal existence, and there is a spiritual aspect to it. The temporal—that describes it perfectly. The natural world is temporally limited, and its actual size is limited by its spiritual logics. They are unchangeable. That is a set beyond which we cannot go; we are bound by time, the temporal.

Wright: This way of conceiving it has brought me a little comfort. I don’t know if it’s wholly right or not, but I do believe that I can play basketball as well as football. What I can’t play is footbasket: I can’t play football according to the rules of basketball or vice versa. That’s chaotic. On the other hand, the monists will say that I can’t be a good football player if I dissipate half of my energies playing basketball. They can’t admit the existence, to say nothing of the validity, of the eternal game without abdicating as naturalists. But I take comfort in believing that I can play both games. How do you feel about that?

Nibley: It’s perfectly true that in this world there is the temporal and the spiritual, and yet there is no distinction between them. There is no system that is not spiritual, and there is none that is not material. The spirit itself is composed of matter. We fuse the two in the gospel; only there can it be done. You can accept the temporal and the spiritual as coexisting. When a person dies, you see, he is forced to face another existence. We don’t like to accept this, though. We want to shut ourselves in.

Wright: If you’re a supernaturalist, you can do it; but you can’t do it as a naturalist.

Nibley: Oh, no! Not as a naturalist. You can never say: “Well, we include the other world in our studies of this world.” You can’t do that. There’s no way you can do that in the laboratory.

Wright: As long as it’s possible for me to play both games, I will, and I will play to the best of my ability.

Nibley: And you can! The gospel will let you do it. It’s the school that won’t let you do it.

Wright: If I were pushed to the wall and forced to choose between the natural and supernatural spiritualities, I would stay with the eternal system. But short of that, I am able to play either game as best I can.

Nibley: We use the word spiritual around here so much, but we never define it, of course.

Wright: I know, and that only deepens the conflict of spiritualities in which we are engulfed. The homo animalis is, after all, a spiritual man, the perfect equivalent of Paul’s psychikos anthropos. The natural man is not the man of flesh, but the man whose spirituality is naturalistic. Compared to profligates, of course, he is the noblest of men; but a whole dimension of his soul is missing in comparison with the pneumatikos anthropos, whose spirituality is revealed from outside the natural order.

That brings us to my second question. In any system of worship, it seems to me, you have to have some basic realities to believe in. And then, I think, you will have to express those realities somehow, or at least attempt to communicate them. Historically, this takes one of two forms: Men have tried either to explain the realities they believe in theologically in rational categories or to present them dramatically in ritual performances. In addition, I suppose, you would also have an ethic, but I’m not interested here in the “wayof-life” business. I’m more interested in the relationship of the doctrinal realities believed in by the Saints both to their theological explanations of those realities in rational terms and to their ritualized presentations of the same things in dramatic terms.

You have known me for a long time. I have a pronounced theological tendency, but I think you know that I sense some dangers in that. Sometimes, when I want to push explanations as far as I can go, I feel ashamed of myself. I back off, I think, because I don’t want to distort the realities I believe in by forcing rational explanations upon them. I also wonder about the relationship of theological explanations to what goes on in the temple where you see ritualized presentations of those realities in dramatic form. What, then, is the relationship of doctrine to theology and ritual?

Nibley: Well, ordinances are more than just symbols— they go beyond that. They can be as simple as a drawing of something that actually is. They always have a double nature: they are or mean something that is real. You see that as soon as you try, in music and art, to give religious experience a third dimension. The gospel actually has that third dimension, of course. But the whole purpose of music and art, and literature too, is to produce the illusion of a third dimension, to produce the illusion that there is depth in the picture. That’s what art does. The painters were scandalized, I read, when they suddenly produced perspective. On a two-dimensional canvas you can produce a third dimension. It’s like looking up into the heights of St. Peters: you can see the angels floating on the clouds, and you get the illusion of ascending up to heaven. But that’s the point: it’s all an illusion, a trick of art, you see; and it will always backfire if you try to do that with the gospel, which is the real thing. That’s why I think we’re wasting our time, mostly, to try heightening religious experience by using such devices in the Church. Once you know the real thing, everything else is an anticlimax. The ward choir can never achieve the same effects as a choir of angels, and yet these things go together.

I was truly amazed when I went to the Kirtland Temple. Look at the work that went into it! It looks like nothing much on the outside but not so on the inside: the workmanship, the design, the way the whole thing is conceived, the scope of it all, the size, the proportions—simply astounding! There is something legitimate there. I can see that the Lord, and not just an angel, has deigned to appear there, knowing how the poor people have worked their heads off for these very same things. And it is really so. They are actually working in a third dimension there: It’s more than just dream and illusion. It’s totally unlike these ugly Gothic, neo-Gothic churches all over the place, these massive pretentious buildings, but of course, they are not genuine. They are imitation Gothic. They try to take you back to the Age of Faith, to the Middle Ages, and all that tripe.

Dialogue: What do you think of our modern Mormon churches?

Nibley: They represent bottom-line economy. The architect gets his five percent by grinding them out on the drawing board. There’s not much imagination shown in them, but once he gets a plan that works, we apply it, with slight variations, to hundreds of churches, regardless of the country or the climate. They all follow the same cinder-block pattern, and the architect makes his killing.

Wright: Okay. Let’s talk about theology for a minute. There are admittedly some dangers here: even Luther said once, “Oh God, deliver me from the theologians.” For all that, however, an angel from God does speak qua theologian in the fifth chapter of Moses. Adam had been instructed to sacrifice the firstlings of his flock as an offering unto the Lord, without knowing the rationale for what he was to do. Adam did as instructed, but after many days, when the angel asked him why he did what he had done, Adam could only answer: “I don’t know why; I only know that I was asked to do it.” The angel then gives a certain amount of theological explanation: “This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father,” and so on.

Nibley: Sure. These things have to be explained.

Wright: We need explanation, then?

Nibley: Yes. But not through speculation. The angel didn’t get his information by speculation.

Wright: Precisely. But in the Western tradition the penchant for rational explanation is very strong, so strong, I think, that we constantly run the risk of valuing our ability to explain things more than the things we are trying to explain. Nibley: Yes, that could happen. It’s all too easy to fall into that trap.

Wright: Well, that’s essentially what I was interested in. I think, though, that much difficulty would be avoided if we could only keep from confusing the temporal and eternal spiritualities and the two sets of rules that go with them. But we are so prone to get them all mixed up.

I reject in principle the academic criticism of prophets. There is something wrong with the football player who criticizes the play of basketball on the basis of the only rules he knows, especially if he believes into the bargain that football is the only game in existence. I can’t bring myself to criticize a prophet for any utterance, no matter how foolish or profound, on the basis of academic rules. I don’t always agree with everything the prophets say, but they are free to say anything they like without opposition from me.

Nibley: Well, there’s so much in Church history on that particular subject. But we have gotten into a concept of authority which is a million miles away from it. This authority business is a dodge. The idea is that every man must answer for himself, must decide for himself. Every president of the Church has repeatedly emphasized that. But it’s so much easier to let someone else make up our minds. Let the prophets do our righteous deeds for us; if they tell us what’s what, that lets us off the hook. Brigham Young has a wonderful quotation on this: “There are some Latter-day Saints who say ‘If it is all right with the brethren, it is all right with me.’” But that, he says, is not enough. We must decide what is virtuous and what is not because we can’t ride into the kingdom on someone else’s coattails.

Dialogue: We are interested in your matriarchal studies. I understand you’re going to lecture at the law school on matriarchies.

Nibley: Oh, yes. I have quite a section on that in this book on Abraham.6 Of course, the Egyptians have the matriarchal tradition. The line passed through the females.

Dialogue: There is quite an interest now in feminist studies, of course.

Nibley: Yes, there is!

Dialogue: About the prehistory of goddesses and the notion that the patriarchy is more recent.

Nibley: The matriarchy is just as old as the patriarchal order.

Dialogue: Do you see that as being any comfort to women?

Nibley: Yes, it should be.

Dialogue: I understand you’ve taken quite an interest in politics recently, especially environmental issues.

Nibley: No, none whatever. That comes out in my speech.7 I call it the “Gentile Dilemma,” the devil’s dilemma, you see. You give people two choices when there are not two at all. It’s a neat trick. Which will it be? Cigars or cigarettes? The answer is, of course, neither one interests us.

Dialogue: What do you think about some of the independent journals, like Dialogue? Do you think they serve a useful purpose?

Nibley: I think so. I think they should keep up. You don’t want too many of them, of course. That would be trouble.

Dialogue: We do have at least four now.

Nibley: But then the idea is pluralism, anyway. If you say, let’s not have any new ones at all, that wouldn’t be good, but you can have too many.

There were refugee journals in France and Berlin, and so forth, in Paris and Berlin. They would come out by the hundreds, and they would just wither as fast as they could come out. Every refugee camp had its own. Dialogue: You wonder if there is that much material worth publishing.

Nibley: Yes, that’s true again. I think that’s what produced much of Dadaism and Impressionism and various wild things you have read about.

Dialogue: There’s space to be filled, and they fill it.

Nibley: Like John Cage, my old bosom companion.

Dialogue: You knew him?

Nibley: Oh, we were the closest friends in high school; we were buddies all through high school. He was quite a character. But he knows he’s spoofing. It paid off beautifully. Did you hear about that?

Unlike Picasso who produces something and puts something in front of you, just anything went with John Cage. He would take a class out and watch the traffic go by, and that was the music lesson for the day. Really, that was it! He said that’s just as good as Bach or Grieg. It’s not structured, it’s open. Imagine! (Laughs.)

Dialogue: With the millennium coming so close, what do you think is the value of fiction and science fiction for members of the Church? Do you think it increases our perspective?

Nibley: It has sort of faded out now because science has left it behind, and especially in the horror department. There is nothing in science fiction more dreadful than the MX.8

Dialogue: It was on the news as one of the biggest public works projects in the history of the world.

Nibley: And it’s never supposed to work because they’d have to send over a dozen or two hydrogen warheads to wipe it out. They can’t zero in on it. They can zero in on the area, but nuclear warheads cover an awful lot of territory.

Dialogue: St. George would be wiped out.

Nibley: Oh, definitely.

Dialogue: Have you read any of Orson Scott Card’s science fiction?

Nibley: Orson Scott Card is a very imaginative writer.

Dialogue: Inventive.

Nibley: A gifted young man. I don’t know if there is still a market for science fiction. I thought it was sort of played out, because after all that we’ve said about it . . .

Dialogue: Well, it seems to be getting quite religious in tone.

Nibley: Yes. It’s not science fiction anymore. This is what Bradbury’s was. It’s not science fiction. They’ve changed it to fantasy, and there’s nothing very scientific about it.

Dialogue: It’s philosophical. . . .

Nibley: Mystic. . . .

Dialogue: Mystic, yes. New language . . .

Nibley: They went into a psychological angle, with Piaget and people like that. The first were the gadgetry, with H. G. Wells, the wonderful world of tomorrow, and the wonderful world of tomorrow turned out to be a nightmare.

Dialogue: There is a lot of medical stuff, too: Diseases, new creatures appearing.

Nibley: Yes, the biological. But the emphasis is horror nowadays. Science did not have the perfect world to offer— it is still just beyond our reach. H. G. Wells was going to give us and science was going to give us so many wonderful things we couldn’t imagine. And he then tried to describe them and turned out a crashing bore.

Dialogue: Do you have any advice for Dialogue, for people like us who are trying to be an independent voice and yet at the same time faithful to the Church?

Nibley: Keep things stirred up—gimmicks to put before the public eye. (Laughter.)

Dialogue: To keep their interest.

Nibley: Do you inveigle General Authorities from time to time to write for you?

Dialogue: We haven’t had much luck with that. What do you see as the greatest problem in the Church?

Nibley: The fact that we don’t live up to our covenants.

Dialogue: We don’t really live the law of consecration?

Nibley: No, we don’t. We have no intention of doing it. There has never been much safety in it. That’s what the Doctrine and Covenants says. It keeps hitting you all the time. You have to dodge and apologize and shift to the next verse, and look the other way. It shouts at you all the way through, and we sidestep it so neatly, “covetous and feigned words.” If I am actually accepting the law of consecration, that rules everything else out. It is beyond discussion anymore. I’m stuck with it now. I have no choice. I do consecrate, here and now, all the Lord has given me, all I have now, as well as what I’m going to get in the future, all my present possessions.

Dialogue: Wonderful!

Nibley: You’d be surprised at what is in that speech.9

Notes

^1. See Abraham in Egypt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981); 2nd ed., CWHN 14 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 2000).

^2. The interviewers are referring to the plaque in the Orson Hyde Memorial Garden in Jerusalem, which was dedicated by President Spencer W. Kimball on 24 October 1979.

^3. “Zeal without Knowledge,” from a lecture presented 26 June 1975, in Approaching Zion, CWHN 9 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1989), 63–84.

^4. American nuclear physicist Steven Weinberg shared the Nobel Prize in Physics with two others in 1979.

^5. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Three Shrines: Mantic, Sophic, and Sophistic” and “Paths That Stray: Some Notes on Sophic and Mantic,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991), 311–79, 380–478.

^6. See “A Pioneer Mother,” in Abraham in Egypt, 149–97; reprinted in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:466–556.

^7. “How Firm a Foundation! What Makes It So,” a lecture given 20 September 1979, in Dialogue 12/4 (1979): 29–45, immediately following this interview; reprinted in Approaching Zion, CWHN 9:149–77.

^8. Nibley is referring to the MX intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM).

^9. Referring again to “How Firm a Foundation!”

6

Hugh Nibley and Kimball Hansen: Candidates for the “Search Society”

This interview conducted by Hal Williams appeared in BYU Today, August 1980, 12–13.

“Of all the communities available to us there is not one I would want to devote myself to, except for the society of the true searchers, which has very few living members at any time.”1 This quotation by Albert Einstein reflects his view: That only those who have experienced the years of anxious searching in the dark—with their intense longing, their alienations of confidence and exhaustion, and the final emergence into light—can understand the attraction of that society. Dr. Kimball Hansen, professor of physics and astronomy, and Dr. Hugh Nibley, professor emeritus of ancient scripture, are members of the “search” society.

The two BYU professors have devoted long careers to searching—not in a summer stargazing sort of way, but in disciplined, all-season researching and reasoning in questions concerning creation. Nibley contends that Mormons have never really appreciated how revolutionary the idea is that things were happening before Adam appeared on the scene.

Hansen and others are working with observational evidence as well as with a certain amount of supposition in order to study major theories of the creation. Among the major theories being studied by astronomers and scientists is the Big Bang theory. The theoretical effect of the bang can be illustrated by gluing several pennies on a balloon. As the balloon expands, the pennies separate.

Einstein’s field equation on how matter generates curvature—Gab = 8πTab—has been added to by other generations of scientists to create a differential equation for the expansion factor:

at 2k + Λ + (8πρmoa03/3) + (8πρroa04/3)

a a2 a3 a4 omit (8π/3)ρ(a)

Hansen says that observational evidence suggests that all of the matter in the universe was in a fairly localized, highly condensed state about fifteen to twenty billion years ago. Matter and energy were then intimately associated. “Two strong pieces of evidence point to this conclusion,” the professor said. “The universe at present is expanding; galaxies are increasing distance from one another. When this expansion is played back in time, scientists conjecture that at one point in time, all the galaxies were in contact with one another.”

Hansen said that the other observational evidence is “cosmic background radiation. Everywhere scientists look in the universe and anywhere they point a radio detector or receiver, they observe a radiation background not coming from any one galaxy or star—just coming from space itself. This radiation is quite uniform and constant in all directions. The radiation is apparently the ‘fireball’ of that tremendous explosion. If such an explosion occurred at hundreds of billions of degrees temperature, then a tremendous blast of radiation accompanied it. And as the universe has expanded since that time, the wavelength has increased and the temperature of the radiation has decreased. This remnant radiation is now down to a temperature of about three degrees above actual zero,” he added.

Hansen sees no problem reconciling this “observational evidence” with the story of the creation as found in the Bible. “In the time scale of our solar system, the biblical account of creation is recent (about five billion years old) as compared with the universe, which is three or four times that. Therefore, a lot went on before the creation of the earth and a lot transpired on this earth before Adam came on the scene.”

Hansen pointed out that the creation of the universe and the creation of earth are not the same. “The universe involves the original evolution of the galaxies. The origin of the solar system can be thought of as a very small, localized event within the galaxy. Evidence suggests that stars are being formed all the time.”

The scientist observes that it is not the when, how, or the what of creation that matters. Rather, it is who did it and why. His answer is that God did it for a purpose.

“If people believe that God is eternal, then they can believe that God was a guiding force in the Big Bang in which worlds without number were created,” Hansen reflected. “There is little discussion in the scriptures regarding the creation of heavenly bodies outside of our own solar system. No scriptures refer to a galaxy and yet the galaxy is a fundamental unit of the universe.”

To Hansen, the creation was on a much grander scale than just this solar system or this earth. It includes the creation of galaxies, which include hundreds of billions of stars. “The creation is more awe-inspiring when one considers the immensity of the universe. I see no reason to suppose that God was not involved in this large-scale creation.”

Alluding to the creation, he suggests that the common Christian philosophy of creating the universe out of nothing is not common among astronomers. “Scientists can’t prove one way or another that there is a divine intelligence present in the universe. Most astronomers, however, will not deny the possibility of a divine or superhuman existence or intelligence.”

The scientist stressed that there are still events happening on earth that help people understand the creation. There is biological creation, of course, but the Mount St. Helens volcano eruptions recently exemplify that the process of creation is still going on.

Recent science fiction movies and television series have helped to awaken an interest in astronomy, but Hansen would be first to admit that it hurts the science because the shows are mostly fiction. “There is very little science—and a lot of fiction,” he charged. “So often the fictional stories change the facts so much that people get a distorted view of science.” One such Disney movie about black holes in space brought considerable attention. Hansen explains what black holes are.

“They represent the end stages of some stars. Gravitational forces are always trying to contract matter, but as long as the star has fuel sources and can create gas pressure, the star can stabilize at some definite volume.

“But once the fuel sources are exhausted, the star loses the fight against gravity and all the matter is condensed into a small volume. The star may be condensed to the point that the neutrons, protons, and electrons close together—lose their identity as particles and then all there is is mass. The force is so intense in the vicinity of that object that not even light can escape.

“Some people ask if the universe began as a condensed glob of material, why was it not a black hole? Well, the diameter of the relevant horizon of the black hole (that is, the region or volume in which light would be trapped) would be comparable to the present volume of the observable extent of the universe itself. So in a sense, we could be living inside a black hole.”

Be that as it may. But Nibley maintains that Mormons, at least, are not totally in the dark. “Mormons are the only Bible-oriented people who have always taught that things were happening long before Adam appeared on the scene.” This revolutionary idea, he says, does away with the “creation out of nothing” theory which has been basic to Christian and Jewish theology alike since the triumph of the School of Alexandria.

“That’s the official definition of all the churches: Adam was the only intelligent actor on any solid world anywhere, being created out of nothing on the only inhabited planet in the entire universe,” Nibley reiterated. “Adam was all alone in the society of God’s creatures and all alone in the emptiness in space . . . the only thinking animal in the only inhabited spot in all the universe.”

“When it began to appear that the earth was only one among countless possible earths and not the one and only center of everything, the discovery was viewed by both sides as a final blow to the dignity of man and the integrity of the Bible. This has always amazed me. Why should life on the other worlds, as a matter of course, render God expendable and the Bible unacceptable?

“Mormons have a story to tell before Adam. But the scientists and other churchmen have none—absolutely none. They set the stage, but they have no play—only properties and props. Joseph Smith at least has given us a picture. With nothing going for him and everything going against him, he simply could not lose—he told us what the play is all about.”

“But is it convincing?” asks Nibley. “The fact is we never look at it closely, preferring to save a lot of trouble and take sides with the traditional schools. And yet, Smith gave the world the only creation story that has real substance.”

The professor says that the “four Adam stories, as found in the Bible, the Book of Moses, the Book of Abraham, and the LDS temples—are seen from different points of view and, like the four gospels, do not conflict if each is put into proper context.”

“The story of the Garden of Eden and the flood has always furnished unbelievers with the best ammunition against believers because they are the easiest to visualize, to popularize, and to satirize of any Bible accounts,” he said. But, apparent strange and extravagant phenomena described in the scriptures are often correct descriptions of what would have appeared to a person in a particular situation such “as we have never been in.”

To describe what he sees to people who have never seen anything like it, the prophet must reach for metaphors and similes. They are reporting, as best they can, what they have seen from a vantage point on which we have never stood.

“A recent study charges that the Abraham story in the Bible must be fictitious because no one else could know the highly intimate things recorded there—nobody, that is, unless it were Abraham himself. The earliest Abraham books were supposed to be autobiographies. The story told from his point of view makes perfectly good sense. That’s why he knew all those intimate things,” Nibley asserts.

“So it was with Noah and the ark. The flood, as described, is what he saw of it. The anthropic cosmological principle specifies that what an observer is able to see of the universe actually makes a difference in the real nature of that universe. It makes the observer an indispensable part of the macrophysical world. Nowhere is the principle of relativity more clearly proclaimed than in the cosmology of the Books of Moses and Abraham.

“When Moses asked to be told everything, God restrained him. He said, ‘Here is wisdom; and it remaineth in me. . . . [W]orlds without number have I created; and I also created them for my own purpose; . . . But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you’ (Moses 1:31, 33, 35).

“Before being introduced to his home planet, Abraham is given a view of the cosmos in which he is reminded again and again that distance, directions, and motions are all represented to him in a way relative to his point of view only. The Lord said, remember this is in relationship to you; it’s not everything. Everything is to be comprehended not in its absolute condition, but only as it appears from one point.”

Nibley points out that the creation process which is described in the Pearl of Great Price is open-ended and ongoing, containing careful planning based on vast experience, long consultation, models, tests, and even trial runs with extensive participation of all creatures concerned. The whole operation is dominated by the overriding principle of love.

“Modern revelation teaches us to look at the genesis of Adam carefully. After the great cycle of creation, then come the small cycles that bring Adam into the picture. And he’s living after the Lord’s time—not after our time. It was day and night from his point of view—not ours. When Adam was put out of the timeless, changeless paradise—he began to count the hours and the days. Until Adam underwent that change of habitat, body, chemistry, diet, and psyche that went with the fall—nothing is to be measured in our years.”

The professor warns that people should not begrudge the creatures’ existence that look like men nor be overly concerned with when and where they might have lived—“for their world is not our world. They have all gone away—they have all left the house on the hill long before our people ever appeared. God assigned them a proper time and season as well as their proper sphere. He predesignated the earth and other earths for multipurpose occupancy. We Latter-day Saints present the scene in dramatic form in which great artistic liberty is allowed because, for us, the story is figurative—not explicit or literal. Although it did take place, we weren’t there,” he concluded.

Note

^1. Albert Einstein in a letter to Max and Hedwig Born, 29 April 1924, in The Born-Einstein Letters (New York: Walker, 1971), 82.

7

A Legendary Passion for Books and Languages

This newspaper article by Jerry Johnston was published in the Deseret News, Friday, 31 October 1980, C1.

This is the eighth in a series of articles detailing the favorite reading of prominent Utahns. Today Dr. Hugh Nibley, professor emeritus of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University, offers his choices.

I’ll give you two words, you give me the name. The words are “Mormonism” and “scholarship.” The name? Right. Hugh Nibley.

“I just plug along trying to satisfy myself on certain subjects,” he says modestly. “I’m much too old to worry about making an impression.”

Still, the impression he leaves is a lasting one. Born in Portland, Oregon, and raised in Los Angeles, Nibley grew up with a passion for books and languages. And examples of that passion are endless; stories still circulate about how— even as a baby—he was drawn to the language figures on his mother’s Asian rug, or how he’d drive to school with a textbook propped on the steering wheel, or answer the door at home without looking up from his reading.

The canon of Nibley “folk tales” continues to grow. As does the man himself.

Nibley completed his doctorate in 1934 at Berkeley and—after a teaching stint at Claremont Colleges—joined the BYU faculty in 1946. His ability in some twenty-one languages and the myriad of articles he’s published around the world have made him a legend there.

Following are six of his favorite titles:

1. John Dover Wilson, ed., The Complete Works of Shakespeare (Cambridge: Mayflower Press, 1980), $19.98.

According to Dr. Nibley, Shakespeare needs no comment. “I got started on it when I was ten by overhearing arguments between my grandfather and Charles W. Penrose. By the time I was thirteen I’d learned Macbeth by heart. I tried memorizing Hamlet, but couldn’t. It was too long.”

Considered not only the finest writer, but one of the wisest men of all time, Shakespeare continues to infatuate critics, actors, theatergoers, and readers.

2. Joseph Smith Jr., The Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1980), $1.00.

“You expected me to say the Bible,” says Nibley. “But the style, content, and authenticity of the Book of Mormon impress me. It’s so full of suggestions. I see it as a pristine document that hasn’t been edited a thousand times as the Bible has. I read the Book of Mormon all the time—especially Alma.”

3. Homer, The Odyssey (Pocket Book), $1.50.

Probably the most influential piece of literature the ancient Greeks have given us, Homer’s Odyssey is an epic poem about the adventures, courage, and stamina of Odysseus (Ulysses) as he tries to return home after the Trojan War.

“Everybody’s wild about the Odyssey,” says Nibley. “It’s a study of the world we live in from a crucial period in world history.”

4. Johann von Goethe, Faust (Oxford: Oxford University Press), parts I and II, $3.95 each.

Goethe (1749–1832) ranks at the top of world literature. His story of Faust, a man overcome by his own ambition, is a prototype upon which many works of literature have been built.

“I like Faust because of the business I’m in,” says Nibley. “The problem of learning, whether it’s worthwhile, the business of being honest—Goethe expresses all that so well.”

5. Gaius Petronius, Satyricon (Mentor-Signet, 1959), $1.75.

Writer Moses Hadas calls Satyricon “an entertaining novel of Roman life; it is unrestrained, but still soundly critical of bad judgment in literature and art.”

Nibley selects the work because it is “the best description of decadence ever written, and it fits our modern world like a glove.”

Petronius, who lived at the time of Christ, was called an “arbiter of elegance” by Nero. Only part of Satyricon has survived today.

6. Jean Froissart, Chronicles (Penguin, 1978), $2.95.

Froissart was a poet and historian whose Chronicles cover France, England, Scotland, and Spain. They are based partly on what he witnessed and partly on research. During the 1360s he served as secretary to Queen Philippa of England where he was able to amass much of his information.

“The best slice of the Middle Ages available,” says Nibley. “I began reading him as a boy and I continue to read him whenever I have the chance.”

8

Nibley Talks about Contemporary Issues

This interview by Lin Ostler Strack was previously published as “Interview: Nibley Talks about Contemporary Issues” in Sunstone Review, November–December 1983, 12–14.

Hugh Nibley, professor emeritus of ancient scripture at Brig-ham Young University, is at 73 the school’s most renowned iconoclast. Though his chief interests are what he calls “the old stuff” (ancient and Romance languages, Egyptology, early scripture), Nibley has been increasingly outspoken on contemporary issues facing the LDS Church. He insists that “this isn’t what I’ve been preparing for and I resent it like the devil.” Still he believes the Spirit has provided him with opportunities to speak out on diverse subjects and “there I go, stirring people up.”

Dr. Nibley was interviewed by staff writer, Lin Ostler Strack, in his office on 11 November 1983. Due to space limitations and the broad line of questioning, we recognize that this interview is necessarily impressionistic rather than exhaustive.

Review: In the October 11th issue of BYU’s Daily Universe there was a prohunting editorial by Jayne Jenkins. In it she argues that “the most dedicated conservationists are the most serious hunter-sportsmen,” that hunting “keeps a healthy balance,” and that the state earns much money on the hunters. She concludes, “When he (the anti-hunter) wises up, he will remember that even the Bible authorizes men to have dominion over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.” What do you think about that?

Nibley: Oh, so that’s dominion, is it? To go out and kill everybody? I have always thought it meant responsibility. I wrote an article in the October 1972 issue of the New Era in which I outlined my philosophy about the creatures. In it I said that I felt the scriptures showed that dominion and lordship over the creatures means that we have a serious responsibility toward the creatures, not the license to exterminate, of all silly things.1

Review: Do you see a philosophy of hunting particular to Latter-day Saints?

Nibley: Yes, there always has been. It’s a frontier attitude, conquering the West, as it were. But of course the presidency of the Church has consistently bucked that attitude. Brigham Young, Joseph F. Smith, and then President Kimball have all talked against it. Joseph Smith said he never carried anything larger than a penknife.2 He who carries a gun will surely regret it. Brigham Young said if the Mormon people weren’t so ignorant, they’d be damned for their treatment of the creatures.3 President Kimball’s bicentennial talk against hunting was very exciting but it had almost no effect whatsoever. They swept it under the rug. We say a prophet is a prophet and then freely interpret how we want.

Review: Did your family influence the development of your feelings toward hunting? Did your father hunt?

Nibley: I’ve never thought of that, but, now that you mention it, I’m sure it was quite important. No, my father never hunted. They taught me it was a very elemental part of the gospel to be at one with all the creatures. They are God’s creatures, and they are going to be resurrected. My mother felt especially strong about it. She frankly felt it was immoral, it was wicked, it was killing. Neither of my parents would touch a gun. When rich nobility, both English and American, came to their place in Cardston to hunt, my parents refused the game. My grandfather, Hugh Russel Sloan, was among the first to settle in Alberta. From the time he was a boy of eleven and for twelve years he had his own herds of sheep and goats. He was in the mountains all day and all night but he never took a gun. When his family arrived there the land was swarming with game. Mother tells of an occasion when her brothers first arrived in Canada; they decided to rustle out the land and they shot their first animal, a gazelle. When they saw the look in that gazelle’s eyes, they never shot another animal. Their first was the last.

Of course Doctrine and Covenants 49 tells us that when we need it, the creatures are willing to contribute but wo unto him who sheddeth blood, takes life when there is no need for it. If we do it for sport, we’ll be damned for it.

Review: The editorial indicated that we are in fact doing the animals a favor by offering them a “quick, bullet-inflicted death” as opposed to the slow starvation some experience in sparse feeding grounds. Do you agree?

Nibley: Aren’t they generous about it? That is why we have so many endangered species. As the game gets more scarce, we get more frantic to hunt it. The reason they are starving is that we’ve occupied their territory. Another doctrine of the Church is that every form of life is to multiply in its sphere and element. We use animal territory for quick-buck subdivisions. Land development is the big thing. Now the only land that’s left is in the wild places. So developers go out, buy it up cheaply, and give it silly, exotic names so people will think they’re getting something wild and romantic. Of course, we’re destroying the wilderness in the process. Those were the proper places assigned to the creatures. We had no business building over the wetlands either and the Lord is showing us that now. Our wetlands have become uninhabitable by the floods because we try to turn everything into a quick profit.

Review: You’ve been a supporter of environmental issues. How do you think we’re doing as a Church in relationship to the planet?

Nibley: Well, I can say the trend toward hunting is more against it than for it but it is a set tradition. Today we’re way behind other states. Ecology and environmentalism are dirty words in Utah. Hatch and Garn hold the record in Washington for being knee-jerk anti-environmentalists.

We’ve been accused of being a Church of doom and gloom because of our name, the Saints of the Latter-days. It used to make people laugh. They’d ask, can’t you have a shorter name? and we’d say no, we have to retain that latter-day part and consider it as such. The latter days have come before and the gospel was always restored in the last days. Catastrophism has become a very real element in history now. There have been times when the earth has been catastrophically smitten. Now the study of climatology has shown us that since 1978 there have been 50 times more earthquakes than ever before. Things are happening that have never happened before. The dream President John Taylor recorded in his journal on 16 December 1877 is a very graphic description of nuclear holocaust or a description of nerve gas. There is no shooting, no guns, no parades, no activity, just widespread destruction. If that wasn’t a nuclear blast he described over New York City, I don’t know what it could be: sudden violent wind and flash of flame and all of the ships in the harbor instantly exploding. No, these times are very serious. It’s all part of the same picture. He who

kills one thing will kill another. A person who kills for his master will not hesitate to kill his master.

Review: In three recent speeches, “Work We Must, but the Lunch Is Free,”4 “We Will Still Weep for Zion,”5 and your BYU commencement address,6 you have in the presence of LDS General Authorities made some strong statements about the direction of the Church. What did you expect to accomplish?

Nibley: I only know that at times like this we can’t keep silent. My sense of urgency comes from the fact that I spend all my days now with the scriptures. And the two marks of the Church I see are and have been for a long time these: a reverence for wealth and a contempt for the scriptures. Naturally, the two go hand in hand. We should call attention to the fact that these things we are doing are against the work of the Lord. There is one saying of Joseph Smith I think of quite often. If the heavens seem silent at a time when we desperately need revelation, it is because of covetousness in the Church. “God had often sealed up the heavens because of covetousness in the Church.”7 And now the Church isn’t just shot through with covetousness, it is saturated with covetousness. And so the heavens are going to be closed. We’re told we don’t get revelation if we put our trust in money in the bank.

Review: How have some of these ideas been received by members of the Church?

Nibley: Some of the people are very impressed. When I gave my “Free Lunch” speech at the Cannon-Hinckley Club, David Kennedy was there. We talked about it, and he asked for copies. It’s interesting that the most favorable response I receive is from business big shots even though I am very critical of wealth. They say they feel guilty when they listen to that stuff but they feel more guilty if they don’t. I’ve been told many, many times that it has changed a person’s whole outlook on business. Some persons have even said, “I’ve known all along something was wrong but I haven’t been able to put my finger on it. I have sensed that’s what scripture says but nobody has ever pointed it out to me. Now that I have had it explained, I understand why I have always felt so uncomfortable.” I’ve had a lot of that sort of confirmation.

Review: There has been some talk about your commencement speech making officials on the stand uncomfortable. Have you had any official negative feedback?

Nibley: No. I submitted the talk in advance and it was enthusiastically approved. So there you are. Every book I have ever written I have always said, if there is any doubt about it I don’t care if it is never published. There is only one thing they censor anyway. You can say anything you want about anything but you must never, never, never say anything disrespectful about money. Even if it were a verse of scripture, they would cut it right out. And now it is even closer to home with Utah being the fraud capital of the world. People simply can’t resist the temptation to make huge profits in a hurry. They get taken again and again because of their greed. Brigham Young said all that needs to be said on the subject; President Kimball has, too, and others. So I just quote everybody like mad. All I say is a montage of what other people have said. So don’t point a finger at me; I just [say] what was there.

Review: You seem to have become a sort of conscience for the Church. It takes a great deal of courage to speak out without fear of reprisal. How did you develop such self-confidence?

Nibley: I didn’t develop it. I started right out at the beginning that way. My first year at BYU, 1946, I was on the committee to organize faculty banquets where we would rib everybody. We would lampoon each other mercilessly in the name of spoofing. The sky was the limit. It was like some of the press banquets today. At BYU we don’t do it anymore, however; we’ve started to take ourselves too seriously.

When I first came here, I went to a few of the apostles, including J. Reuben Clark, Richard L. Evans, and John Widtsoe to ask if it would be better to remain low-key, keep my nose clean, and avoid these things. The answer was always the same: That is the worst thing you could do. We’ve got to have some voices speaking out because everybody knows that all the virtue isn’t on one side of what we’re doing. Since then I haven’t shifted one iota.

After Henry D. Moyle gave his first talk at BYU I told him that when he hit the podium, I heard a cash register ring. He laughed. He was a very wealthy man, but he was frank and outspoken and we had wonderful talks.

Review: Do you feel we are as a people preparing ourselves for a Zion society?

Nibley: I don’t know. I can’t say because that is the Lord’s work and not mine. It isn’t my calling. I guess every man should counsel his brethren but I certainly have to be counseled as much as anybody. And as soon as you start talking with this or that person you realize that they are much nearer it than you are, and that goes for some of the Brethren.

I’m simply pointing out what the scriptures say. We’re emphasizing the scriptures in Sunday School this year but our approach is extremely superficial. My answer to all this is to ask the Lord and he will tell you what to do as long as you behave yourself. Nothing in the world is more personal than that.

Review: What are you working on now?

Nibley: I’m getting deeper and deeper into the old study. I’m more and more sure of sources. I’ve been collecting some marvelous stuff on Joseph Smith recently. I could say my testimony gets stronger every day. These scriptures are true; they are real. As the literature expands and associations turn up, you realize that all scholarship is comparative scholarship. There is no end.

I was in Independence, Missouri, for the first time last month to give a talk. I went to Adam-ondi-Ahman and Haun’s Mill. I was told that there is nothing to it, nothing out there. Boy, they couldn’t have been more wrong. Adam-ondi-Ahman is the real thing. I am absolutely sure of it.

Review: Was that a spiritual witness?

Nibley: No. It was simply sizing up the territory. I made all these comparisons about the temple and decided it is the perfect setting for what is supposed to happen. The atmosphere was something extraordinary. Haun’s Mill was a very haunting, eerie sort of place. The stream is a lugubrious, midwestern mud stream in a deep gully with trees on either side. Very depressing.

Review: Are you doing much work with early Mormon texts?

Nibley: A lot of other people are doing that, making documents available now, for which I am extremely grateful. But no, I am mainly working with the inspired works, the scriptures. The woods are crawling with people who can do research on the early Church. I won’t spend time on that. But what excites me is when Joseph starts to give us books of Abraham and Enoch and Adam and apocryphal writings and reconstructions of the New Testament and inspired translations of the Bible. Then you can go back to old sources and see if that is comparative, see if he has a leg to stand on. Once you start comparing, there is no end, but it gives you such marvelous control over Joseph Smith and his critics. His timing was so perfect.

Notes

^1. Hugh W. Nibley, “Man’s Dominion,” New Era 2 (October 1972): 24–31; reprinted as “Man’s Dominion, or Subduing the Earth,” in Brother Brigham Challenges the Saints, CWHN 13 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1994), 3–22.

^2. Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph, comp. and ed. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Provo, UT: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1980), 367.

^3. See Journal of Discourses, 15:227.

^4. “Work We Must, but the Lunch Is Free,” a talk given 20 April 1982 to the Cannon-Hinckley Club at the Lion House in Salt Lake City, in Approaching Zion, CWHN 9 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1989), 202–51.

^5. “We Will Still Weep for Zion,” a revised transcript of a follow-up talk given in 1984, in Approaching Zion, CWHN 9:341–77.

^6. “Leaders to Managers: The Fatal Shift,” a BYU commencement address delivered on 19 August 1983, in Brother Brigham Challenges the Saints, CWHN 13 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1994), 491–508.

^7. Donald Q. Cannon and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., Far West Record: Minutes of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830–1844 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), 23.

Part 3

Reviews by Hugh Nibley

9

Review of Our Book of Mormon

This review of Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Stevens and Wallis, 1947), by Sidney B. Sperry, appeared in the Improvement Era 51 (January 1948): 42.

Professor Sperry has written a forthright, methodical study of the Book of Mormon that hews to the line and never flinches. With refreshing directness the author raises and answers searching but simple questions one after another that surprise the reader by their obviousness and almost alarm him with the sense of his own ignorance. The strange story of the wandering Moroni, the fate of the Urim and Thummim, the nature of the Nephite Church, God’s dealings with the world at large, to which he vouchsafes revelation of a sort—point after point of long-neglected lore is put on display, much of it for the first time, by the researches of Dr. Sperry. No one is better qualified to handle such material than he. The last man in the world to “go overboard” for any one theory, Professor Sperry never temporizes and never quibbles; the tricks and pitfalls of rhetoric he avoids like the plague. The result is a plain, almost blunt take-it-orleave-it classroom discourse which for all its simple honesty exercises a strange fascination on the reader. Perhaps the principal reason for this is the way the book is interlined with quotations from the Book of Mormon itself: no mere hints and phrases but whole pages to remind the reader again and again of the weight and power of that great and compelling book—a mighty revelation which we neglect at our peril. Dr. Sperry’s persistent campaign in its behalf deserves nothing but praise. The value of Our Book of Mormon is enhanced by the welcome addition of a scripture index, a substantial aid to the student that is all too rarely met within our Church writings.1

Note

^1. Several chapters from Sperry’s 1947 Our Book of Mormon were included in Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 4/1 (1995): 1–174.

10

Review of The Ancient World

This book review of The Ancient World (New York: Harper, 1950), by Joseph Ward Swain, was printed in the Historian 13 (Autumn 1950): 79–81. Reprinted with permission of Wiley-Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The student undertaking a tour of the larger past now has an up-to-date Baedeker that neither surfeits with detail nor frustrates by omission. In a field that covers ten times the area of other branches of history, Professor Swain has made a valiant and successful effort to strike a balance between the intensive and the extensive view. Long experience in teaching is apparent in the author’s uncompromising insistence on perfect clarity and order at all times as the one hope of salvation in a subject that is not only terrifying in its extent but utterly strange to the average student. This gives his text a certain guidebook quality that is not unpleasing and should in time endear it to learners at every level. Thanks to Dr. Swain’s efforts, the general student may now, with a minimum of time and effort, get a really comprehensive idea of “what is there,” the budding researcher can scan the whole field with unobstructed view before making up his mind, and the specialist, ever prone to forget the world at large, can take his bearings from time to time without ransacking his library.

With admirable strength of will, Professor Swain resolutely refuses to become sidetracked even on the most tempting issues. In this he runs the risk of appearing at times a bit mechanical: each Roman emperor gets one paragraph; the scholars of the past are discussed not with an eye to their relative importance, but in such a way as “to mention men of as many different sorts as possible” (p. 1:xx)—alphabetically, as it were. Yet this very formality is a virtue in a work which is to serve primarily as a Leitfaden (introduction). By the same token, the strictly conventional arrangement and treatment of material is a boon to the student who, as we too often forget, needs first of all to be at home in conventional history before he can appreciate the significance of new departures. If his text resembles at times a catalogue, it is because the author, faced with the cruel choice of sacrificing either depth or breadth, has chosen to ring many bells in quick succession in preference to making great noise on a few. We think the choice has been a wise one, for whereas no student has a right to expect exhaustive treatment of any one theme in a general text, the charge of omitting from such a text some item that might be considered vital is not so easily answered.

It would be hard to pick a broader target for attack than any book presuming to embrace the whole scope of ancient history. Such a work should, for that very reason, be a work of genius. But how long must we wait for a Bury or a Gibbon to appear? Somebody had to do the job, and Professor Swain—brave, foolhardy man—has done it, and done it well. The drawbacks of such an undertaking are obvious, as the author is perfectly aware. Of course he must oversimplify, as in the naively materialistic comparison of Babylonian and Egyptian cultures (pp. 1:96–97). He must perforce present hundreds of still disputed points as facts—for if we are to remind the student at every turn of all the objections that can and have been raised to every statement ever made by a writer of ancient history, he will soon lose interest in the subject, as a healthy alternative to losing his mind. To follow the old evolutionary groove (“their whole existence was brutish and precarious”—how does he know?) is a great time- and thought-saver, but it is playing with loaded dice: “Naturally the earlier kingdoms were neither large nor firmly established” (p. 1:65). “Naturally” anticipates research and predisposes minds that should be open. Why should early kingdoms naturally be smaller than later ones? By what law? By Mr. Herbert Spencer’s, to be sure. Some omissions are inevitable, but one wishes the author had said more about what are possibly the two most important contributions to ancient history in our time—namely, the discovery of changing weather conditions in antiquity and their close correlation with migration, revolution, and war and the recent comparison and interpretation of ritual texts, calling as they do for a complete revaluation of ancient thought and letters. It is regrettable—to none, we dare say, more than to Professor Swain himself—that our author must forego the luxury of being chatty and anecdotal. Here he graciously leaves the field wide open to the lecturer, who will find not a decibel of his thunder stolen by the new text; nay, his role is splendidly augmented by the need for frequent commentary on the book and, some will feel, for correction.

What perfectly golden clues for the teaching assistant to display his erudition! Sappho was not “the first and only woman among the Greek poets” (p. 1:344); in borrowing Sumerian characters the Semites did not disregard “the original pictographic meaning of the ideogram” (p. 1:73) but often put it to good use; it was not the cross but the labarum that Constantine saw in his vision (p. 2:588). And so forth. The classroom oracle will be no less beholden to the professor for committing himself freely on many moot points: were Catiline’s followers really only a motley crew without the remotest chance of succeeding? Did the Ionian philosophers “bridge the gap between religion and philosophy” (p. 1:338), or did they not widen or even create it? Is Alexander “taking his cue from Aristotle” in his conception of divine leadership (p. 2:34) or from some more likely source such as Pindar, who loudly proclaims what Aristotle merely hints at? Were the Greeks actually more race-minded than other people? Again, mind reading is fair game for everyone, and student and teacher alike should derive solid pleasure from pouncing on some of Dr. Swain’s conjectures as to the motives of such publicized history makers as Darius, Caesar, and Paul.

The most serious restriction the author has had to face has been the iron necessity of bypassing sources and omitting footnotes. One might as well teach geology without rocks or botany without plants as history without documents. But que faire? Are the youth of the land to be denied all knowledge of the past simply because only an expert can read the sources? Is the only alternative to exhaustive research to be total ignorance? Alas, the true answer would be the ruin of us all! We must assume that there is a usable residue of valid knowledge in the half-real, dimly discerned, vaguely tangible stuff that comes to us from antiquity. Professor Swain is keenly aware of these limitations. The construction of history, he tells us more than once, is an art; it is the historian’s own mind, and not the infallible reading of instruments, that creates history. Such being his faith, how does he happen to give us this kind of compact and factual history? It is plainly because he has the student’s interest most at heart.

Before the present-day learner invests his reluctant energies in a line of study, he wants to see the whole field, and that is just what Dr. Swain shows him; hardly more than a glance at each item, it is true, but a clear glance it is, and all the items are put on the counter, even down to the latest gadgets. This is exactly what we want today. After all, for its purpose—a legitimate one—the mail-order catalogue can’t be excelled.

If Professor Swain had not done it for him, every really conscientious student of history would have to make for himself a notebook very much like the text here provided. Such a notebook could not well be more inclusive than these two volumes, for our author has been thorough; nor could it well be confined to smaller scope, for the plethora of important names and dates calls for explanation and commentary at every point, and that is here offered in the neatest and most compact form that is compatible with simple and lucid explanation. Students and teachers alike owe Professor Swain a vote of thanks for his diligent and well-ordered spadework. His text is all it claims to be—and that is much.

11

Review of History of Syria

This review of History of Syria: Including Lebanon and Palestine (New York: Macmillan, 1951), by Philip K. Hitti, appeared in Western Political Quarterly 5/2 (June 1952): 312–13.

Professor Hitti’s Syria is not a political entity, having almost never “stood as an independent sovereign state”; neither is it a geographical, ethnic, or cultural one, for its “conglomeration of different regions” contains “a crazy quilt of ethnic groups and religious denominations” (p. 59). What then is Syria? It is the largest area to which the name has ever been (however incorrectly) applied. It contains Palestine and Lebanon, since there was a time when each was included “in its ancient boundaries” (p. 3); by the same token Aylah and Maqna, both on the Gulf of al->Aqabah, are considered “places in Syria” (p. 410), and the ancient Hebrews are “early Syrians.” “Syria” discovered copper and wheat and gave the world the alphabet, “monotheism, and the discovery of the Atlantic Ocean” (p. 109), to say nothing of Christianity, another purely Syrian product, “though the civilized world does not always appreciate this fact.” The greatest of all inventions, we are told, was the alphabet, “developed and disseminated by the ancient Lebanese” (p. 3). Would anyone but a Lebanese think of making that strictly modern title synonymous with the name of an ancient and vanished civilization?

To match an area so vast, Dr. Hitti must cover in a single volume the history and prehistory of Palestine, the religion of Israel, the Hellenistic world, the rise of the Christian Church, the Crusades, and a large segment of Greek literature, to mention but a few highly specialized fields into which he conducts the reader. Naturally there are slips (did the walls of Babylon really stand three hundred feet high?), and one is disturbed by the author’s habit of annotating his remarks by references to biblical and classical sources (for example, Ammianus Marcellinus) instead of the modern authors from whom he got them. “What Greece was to the Romans,” we are told, “Syria was to the Arabians.” Say rather that what Greece was to the Romans, Greece was also to the Arabs, thanks to Syrian transmitters; but to make Syria the creative equivalent of Greece goes much too far and certainly overlooks the claims of Persia, which Professor Hitti hardly deigns to notice.

However, all is forgiven when Dr. Hitti launches into the last sections of the book, a good three hundred pages presenting as useful and instructive a guide to the Near East in medieval and modern times as has yet appeared. Here the author is completely at home and handles his materials with confidence and skill. Others have opened windows on these vistas, but none offers a broader, clearer, more comprehensive view of the whole scene than that which Professor Hitti gives us here. As he moves rapidly from event to event and from century to century, the author is allowed all too little space for those picturesque diversions and anecdotes that are the delight of Oriental history, but his choice of materials is masterful, and the things he chooses to tell us are invariably the things the student needs most to know. This is textbook history at its best: orderly, comprehensive, accurate, and remarkably complete. For the purpose of familiarizing a generation of American students with an era of our past which is almost a complete blank in the minds even of educated Westerners, it would be hard to improve on Dr. Hitti’s splendid chapters on the Arab era. Students everywhere of history, political science, and the humanities should receive this valuable work with joy and gratitude.

12

Review of Near Eastern Culture and Society

This review of Near Eastern Culture and Society: A Symposium on the Meeting of East and West (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1951), ed. T. Cuyler Young, appeared in Western Political Quarterly 5/2 (June 1952): 315–16.

As a vade mecum to the study of Near Eastern humanities, this book should prove very useful. The first half of the volume is a survey in which the reader is introduced very briefly to the great names of the past in Oriental scholarship, given his bearings, as it were, in a world of specialists. In part 2, dealing with “Current Problems of Near Eastern Peoples,” we are introduced to a Turkey badly in need of “religious and philosophical reform” (p. 129), an Iran suffering from a resurgent clergy and a decline of morals (p. 145), and an Arab world that calls for “a spiritual awakening,” and finds itself as usual “in the midst of a crisis” (p. 148).

But what of the main problem? It is noteworthy that in a work that warns the world that a broad meeting of East and West must take place soon if either is to survive, no mention is made of movies, radio, or the popular press. This is the more remarkable since our writers insist that the tragic gap between the two worlds is basically a cultural one. In cautioning against the “romantic” and “sentimental” views that the East and West have taken of each other in the past, the contributors ignore the one possible solution to their problem of general cultural understanding. What Western Orientalist was ever led into his field by any but the “romantic” appeal of it? What Oriental nation ever adopted Western ways without idealizing them to an absurd degree? Determined to keep all approaches to East and West on an impeccably correct scientific and scholarly level, our authors forget that they must deal with masses, that even the obscene Oriental-ism of Hollywood and the comics shows a sort of nostalgia in the West for things Oriental, and that a game of backgammon in a Syrian restaurant or a Turkish bath can come far nearer to achieving a cultural meeting of minds and tastes than any displays of Persian miniatures, Abbasid coins, or twelfth-century armor. They also forget that strong ties of sympathy between nations and cultures are not a matter of correct and objective estimates of each other, but of pure sentimentalism—witness this country’s standing bonds with England or France. In the meeting of East and West for which these scholars are striving, the common man is left quite out of the picture as an active participant.

Even more disturbing is the systematic neglect of Israel in this study. This is excused on the grounds that “the Princeton bicentennial conference which originated the volume occurred before the Arab-Zionist war” (p. 12). Yet the volume itself was published after that war, to which its contributors often refer as a thing of the past. No less realistic approach to the problems of the Near East can be imagined than one which simply dismisses Israel, as these authors do, as a terrible mistake.

An excellent diagnosis of the ills of the East, this book has little to offer in the way of a cure. While one authority assures us that the Arabs will “move from their medieval state into the modern world” (p. 114) only when they realize that religion is a purely spiritual and personal matter, another announces that the “new generation of Muslim intellectual leaders . . . reject[s] the Western doctrine that religion is a matter only of private conscience” (p. 237). And what is our feeling toward Islam supposed to be when the “New Turkey cannot yet afford to be idealistic” and displays “little fellow-feeling for the Arabs as brother-Muslims” (p. 186)? The book ends, as all symposia on East and West seem to do, with a timely admonition to the West to put its own house in order.

13

Review of The Torment of Secrecy

This review of The Torment of Secrecy: The Background and Consequences of American Security Policies (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1956), by Edward A. Shils, appeared in American Political Science Review 50/3 (September 1956): 887–88.

For one seeking a brief and lucid explanation of America today it would be hard to find a better tract than the sections of Professor Shil’s book entitled “The Deeper Sources” and “The Strain of Politics.” This brilliant sketch of the immediate background of the starts and alarums of the past ten years is, however, delivered in support of a thesis which involves the author in an emotional predicament from which he cannot escape. He divides the nation into two—just two—camps: “The really crucial dividing line in politics is between pluralistic moderation and monomaniac extremism” (p. 227). Then he proceeds to denounce the bad camp of wrong-headed, fantasy-obsessed extremists, lunatics, and paranoiacs for the unpardonable sin of thinking that the world is divided into just two camps—“a state of mind which sees only white and black” (p. 45; see p. 236). The “nativist tradition,” he tells us, should be “confined to the alleys and bars and back streets and to the hate-filled hearts of the miserable creatures who espouse it” (p. 15). Hate-filled the creatures may be, but in Professor Shils they have found their match.

One wishes he would not rant so against the ranters, or become so emotional in denouncing emotionalism, or so passionately censure the attitude of those who censure others for their attitudes, or indulge so often in those absolute statements against which he clamors: for example, “No society has ever been so extensively exposed to public scrutiny as the United States in the twentieth century” (p. 39). Has he ever considered the Greek or Latin zest for living private lives in public, or the complete publicity of European peasant and court communities? This regrettable lack of wider historical perspective is reflected in a loose use of terminology, as in his identification of “the national ‘spirit’” with the Spirit of God in revivalist thinking (p. 207), or in his way of describing the opposition as “mad.”

For Professor Shils the scientific community “is the epitome of the free society” (p. 190). Now no one needs to be told that science at its best should not take orders from the populist mob at its worst; but never in this book is there the slightest indication that science is ever at anything but its best. For Professor Shils it is all black and white.

Having given a first-rate description of the disease, Professor Shils can think of no better cure than good health. More reasonableness and common sense are indicated in a pluralistic system in which everyone tolerates everyone else. Professor Shils is against any strong feeling—except where it is desirable; secrecy and publicity are alike vicious—except when properly practiced; extremism is the root of all evil— except “in a small quantity” (p. 237). This small quantity is everything; “respectable” is a favorite word; Professor Shils yearns for a tepid academic world based on “the belief . . . that there is a sacred element in the law”—only that belief must never be carried to the point of enthusiasm or passion (pp. 160–61). Like Bottom, Professor Shils will “roar you as gently as any sucking dove,”1 and the result is neither a good roar nor a convincing plea for moderation.

Note

^1. William Shakespeare, Midsummer Night’s Dream, act 1, scene 2, lines

Part 4

Forewords by Hugh Nibley

14

Foreword to Learn Greek through the New Testament

This foreword appeared in Learn Greek through the New Testament, by C. Wilfred Griggs and Randall Stewart, ed. Alan F. Keele and Marvin H. Folsom (Provo, UT: The Interlinguistica Series in Foreign Languages, 1981), i.

Greek at a time like this? This of all times, for Greek is the toughest and most enduring monument to the human spirit. After three thousand years of competition it still holds all the top prizes in such genres as epic literature, tragedy, comedy, lyric poetry, history, philosophy, fairy stories, hymns, love-songs. . . . Even in science—though of course left far behind—Greek masters such as Aristotle, Heraclitus, or Euclid can still instruct the student.

Not the least of the wonders of Greek are its spiritual contributions. For it was the chosen vessel of the New Testament; while the oldest text of the Old Testament—esteemed as an inspired translation by the Jews and quoted as such by the ancient apostles—was the Greek Septuagint. Accordingly, the foundations of all conventional Christian theology were laid in Greek mortar by the fathers and doctors of the church; while the newly discovered Apocrypha are likewise overwhelmingly Greek. Incidentally, Greek is also our principal informant in matters relating to Egypt and the ancient Near East.

When everything is passing away in an apocalyptic climax, it is comforting and strengthening to get close to something which—itself formed in the crucible of terrible crises and trials—has survived as fresh and vigorous as ever, setting before us the treasures of the other dispensations in the greatest spread of intellectual, artistic, and spiritual nourishment the human race possesses.

We do not study ancient languages in order to translate from them, but to read, ponder, savor, and, if possible, sound the depths of those things which cannot be translated but only tentatively paraphrased. Nowhere are they more enticing and challenging than in that most subtle, vivacious, and sensitive language: Greek.

Joseph and his brethren in Kirtland and Nauvoo seized avidly upon the study of ancient languages as a vital aid to their study of the scriptures, for they had been commanded to do so. It was no mere obligation of cultural refinement imposed upon the Saints when God told them—through the great dedicatory prayer of the first temple, setting it aside as “a house of learning, a house of prayer, a house of faith, a house of study”—to “seek . . . out of the best books words of wisdom, seek learning even by study and also by faith.” The order was repeated for emphasis; but no list of “best books” was prescribed or provided, for the specific charge to the brethren was that they should “seek diligently” to find these things out for themselves (cf. D&C 109:7–8, 14).

Such a search begins with the scriptures—and with Greek: we cannot read either Testament critically without it, for a translation is someone else’s interpretation, and we have been told often that each man must search the scriptures for himself. Nor may the student distinguish too sharply between the sacred and the profane in Greek since the Bible itself is full of quotations taken from the Greek classical writers.

Those who think “practical matters” are more worthy of their time, who would reverse the first commandment given to the Church in this dispensation: “Seek not for riches but for wisdom” (D&C 11:7), should be notified that while by common consent the Greeks are indisputably “number one” in Wisdom literature, they have also produced an unrivaled gallery of filthy rich tycoons in our own day and have left us the standard guidebooks and commentaries on matters of politics, business, social problems, and law. If you want to get serious in almost any field of study you cannot escape the Greeks. Every student at some time or other should at least give them a try.

15

Foreword to Working toward Zion

This foreword appeared in Working toward Zion: Principles of the United Order for the Modern World, by James W. Lucas and Warner P. Woodworth (Salt Lake City: Aspen Books, 1996), ix–xi.

Within a few years of the pioneers’ arrival in the Great Basin, the Prophet Brigham Young asked: “What does the Lord want of us up here in the top of these mountains? He wishes us to build up Zion. What are the people doing? They are merchandizing, traffic[k]ing and trading.”1 In my old age I have taken to reading the scriptures and have had it forced upon my reluctant attention that from the time of Adam to the present day, Zion has been pitted against Babylon, and the name of the game has always been money—“power and gain.”

This new book, Working toward Zion, by Warner Wood-worth and James Lucas, responds to Brother Brigham’s criticism and his inquiry to the Saints regarding God’s united order principles: “Why can we not so live in this world?” Building off the articles and speeches collected in Approaching Zion, this new book traces the problems of both capitalism and socialism from the rise of the Industrial Revolution to the present day. It shows how these twin economic systems diametrically oppose scriptural ideals of Zion.

According to Brother Brigham, “Elders are agreed on the way and manner necessary to obtain celestial glory, but they quarrel about a dollar. When principles of eternal life are brought before them—God and the things pertaining to God and godliness—they apparently care not half so much about them as they do about five cents.”2 “Instead of reflecting upon and searching for hidden things of the greatest value to them, [the Latter-day Saints] rather wish to learn how to secure their way through this world as easily and as comfortably as possible. The reflections, what they are here for, who produced them, and where they are from, far too seldom enter their minds.”3 Well, what was wrong with that? Isn’t a comfortable living what we all want? It would be all right if we did not have our choice, but if we fail to realize that “we are engaged in a higher-toned branch of business than any merchants or railroad men, or any institution of an earthly nature,”4 and give priority to the comfortable and respectable life after we have seen the greater light, we are in great danger. “Are their eyes single to the building up of the kingdom of God? No; they are single to the building up of themselves.”5 “Does this congregation understand what idolatry is? The New Testament says that covetousness is idolatry; therefore, a covetous people is an idolatrous people.”6 “Man is made in the image of God, but what do we know of him or ourselves, when we suffer ourselves to love and worship the god of this world—riches?”7

Ancient as well as modern prophets have called us to abandon the economics of competition and inequality in favor of what President David O. McKay refers to as “the complete ideal of Mormonism.”8 The scriptures call it Zion, a place in which people live as follows:

All are “of one heart and one mind, . . . and there [are] no poor among them” (Moses 7:18), thus showing that equality extends into all fields, as it must also be in the preparation for Zion: “For if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things; For if you will that I give unto you a place in the celestial world, you must prepare yourselves” (D&C 78:6–7). “And you are to be equal, . . . to have equal claims, . . . every man according to his wants and his needs, . . . Every man seeking the interest of his neighbor, and doing all things with an eye single to the glory of God” (D&C 82:17, 19).

God recognizes only one justification for seeking wealth, and that is with the express intent of helping the poor (Jacob 2:19). One of the disturbing things about Zion is that its appeal, according to the scriptures, is all to the poor: “The Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it” (Isaiah 14:32). Of course, once in Zion, no one suffers from poverty, for they dwell in righteousness and there are “no poor among them” (Moses 7:18). The law of consecration is a minimal requirement, for “if my people observe not this law, . . . it shall not be a land of Zion unto you” (D&C 119:6).

In stark contrast to the pride and power struggles of the world, true Saints have always sought the things of eternity rather than material success. They labor for a higher order, even a holy order. The question I have been asked most frequently by Saints who read or hear the pieces in Approaching Zion is “but what can we do? how do we do it?” Woodworth and Lucas suggest that there is much we can and must do to consecrate our lives to the blessing of others. This book is not a call to formally enter into the united order, but for each of us to do all we can to move toward Zion in this contemporary era. Drawing upon the scriptures and prophets of this dispensation, Working toward Zion conveys a vision of how to apply God’s temporal teachings here and now in the modern world economy.

Notes

^1. Journal of Discourses, 12:154.

^2. Ibid., 9:249.

^3. Ibid., 7:282.

^4. Ibid., 15:34.

^5. Ibid., 11:324–25.

^6. Ibid., 6:196.

^7. Ibid., 10:267.

^8. David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953), 106.

Part 5

Personal

16

The Christmas Quest

This item originally appeared in Millennial Star 112/1 (January 1950): 4–5.

Long before the Christian Church was ever heard of, people throughout the world celebrated one great festival that far overshadowed all other social activities in importance. That was the great year-rite, the celebration of the creation of the world and the dramatization of a plan for overcoming the bondage of death. It took place at the turn of the year when the sun, having reached its lowest point on the meridian, was found on a joyful day to be miraculously mounting again in its course; it was a day of promise and reassurance, heralding a new creation and a new age. Everywhere the great year-festival was regarded as the birthday of the whole human race and was a time of divination and prophecy, marked by a feast of abundance in which all gave and received gifts as an earnest hope of good things to come.

There is plenty of evidence in the early Christian writings that Christ was born not at the solstice but in the spring, early in April. Much has been written on the shifting of his birthday celebration to make it coincide with the day of Sol Invictus, a late romanized version of an oriental midwinter rite. In other parts of the world, people had no difficulty identifying the Lord’s birthday with the greatest of popular festivals. When Pope Zacharias rebuked the Germans on the Rhine for their pagan festival at midwinter, Boniface could answer him back, that if he objected to heathen feasts and games all he had to do was look around him at Rome where he would see the same feasting, drinking, and games on the same ancient holy days to celebrate the same blessed event—he was referring, of course, to the Saturnalia, the great prehistoric festival of the Romans. Our own Yule, carols, lights, greenery, gifts, and games are evidence enough that a northern Christmas is no importation from the East in Christian times but something far older.

Now there is no law of the mind that requires all men everywhere to put just one peculiar interpretation on the descent and return of the sun in its course. This complex and specialized festival, which follows so closely the same elaborate pattern in Babylonia, Egypt, Iceland, and Rome is now recognized to be no spontaneous invention of untutored minds but the remnant of a single tradition ultimately traceable to one common lost source. The essential feature of this great world festival everywhere is that it aims, if but for a few short days, to recapture the freedom, love, equality, abundance, joy, and light of a Golden Age, a dimly remembered but blessed time in the beginning when all creatures lived together in innocence without fear or enmity, when the heavens poured forth ceaseless bounty, and all men were brothers under the loving rule of the King and Creator of all. Is it at all surprising that the Christian world’s celebration of the Savior’s birth should fall easily and naturally into the pattern of the older rites? In the end they are really the same thing—both are recollections of forgotten dispensations of the gospel; both are attempts to recall an age of lost innocence and lost blessings.

Lost? Who can doubt it? There is a nostalgic sadness about Christmas as there is about the Middle Ages, with their everlasting quest of something that has been lost. Christmas is a small light in a great darkness; it is evidence of things not seen. It is not the real thing, but the expression of a wish, for like the great year-rites of the ancients it merely dramatizes what once was and what men feel they can still hope for. A brief, brave show of generosity and cheer is our assurance that earth can be fair, and we gladly join with all mankind in the gesture. In so doing we would remind the world that Christmas is both a demonstration of man’s capacity for enjoying good and sharing it and of his helplessness to supply it from his own resources. The great blessings we seek at Christmas are not of our own making (the everyday world is our handiwork) but must come from another world, even as Father Christmas comes to the children as a visitor from afar. The painful fact that Christmas has an end and “all things return to their former state” is an adequate commentary on the actual state of things. The world, which denies revelation, once a year has a moment of lucidity in which men are permitted to hope; then it returns to its old disastrous routine—but because of Christmas that routine can never be the same. For men have allowed themselves to be caught off guard; for a brief moment they have let down the barriers and shown where their hearts really lie. Scrooge, the man of business, can never go back again after his Christmas fling—however ashamed he may be of it in the cold light of day, it is too late to deny that he has shown Scrooge, the man of the world, to be but a mask and an illusion.

So the Latter-day Saints have always been the greatest advocates of the Christmas spirit; nay, they have shocked and alarmed the world by insisting on recognizing as a real power what the world prefers to regard as a pretty sentiment. Where the seasonal and formal aspect of Christmas is everything, it becomes a hollow mockery. If men really want what they say they do, we have it, but faced with accepting a real Savior who has really spoken with men they draw back, nervous and ill at ease. In the end, lights, tinsel, and sentimentality are safer, but a sense of possibilities still rankles, so to that we shall continue to appeal. For by celebrating Christmas the world serves notice that it is still looking for the gospel.

17

Nobody to Blame

This open letter, addressed to “Dear Brother Burgon,” (a BYU graduate student) was dated 29 July 1960; the cover letter, dated 3 August 1960, was addressed to “Dear Brother.”

3 August 1960

Dear Brother,

What one most misses in our Utah institutions is that air of intellectual candor, that free and searching discussion of the schoolmen, their ways and their foibles, which is the principal delight and, in the end, the main justification of institutions of higher learning. Seen in proper perspective, the doings of the learned are high comedy, and we who profess publicly and for a fee are fair game for any criticism, as Justice Learned Hand has noted in a significant decision: “It is indeed not true that all ridicule . . . or all disagreeable comment . . . is actionable; a man must not be too thin-skinned or a self-important prig.”1 This rule, which allows for fair and free comment, applies to all professions and all persons who submit their work to the public. This includes teachers, ministers, educators, lawyers, doctors, architects. Elsewhere the New York District Court has wisely decided that “fair and legitimate criticism is always permitted upon any work to which the attention of the public has been invited. . . . If the public is to be aided in forming its judgment upon matters of public interest by a free interchange of opinion, it is essential that honest criticism and comment, no matter how foolish or prejudiced, be privileged.”2 The final clause is my franchise—why should we not feel free to speak on matters that concern us all? In an apocryphal but very ancient account, Peter, in the course of a debate with Simon Magus, points out that people either take themselves or the gospel very seriously—nobody ever takes both seriously.3 At our Utah universities we take ourselves very seriously, but the suppression of free and open discussion of things academic, while it provides needed security to those who have reason to shun honest scrutiny, can only contribute in the long run to mounting jealousy, suspicion, and tension. There is a point beyond which reticence ceases to be prudence and makes only for misunderstanding. The following letter, to a BYU graduate student in religion, is meant to be only helpful and constructive. In the present state of things, to keep silent could only be harmful, and speaking out might do some good.

29 July 1960

Dear Brother Burgon,

It is high time I was explaining my reluctance to assist people in getting Ph.D. degrees in religion or anything else here at the BYU. The time is not ripe for that sort of thing, and I wonder if it ever will be. Why, for example, should I attempt to introduce you to the mysteries of Egyptian when within a few hundred miles of here is a man with only one or two students who knows a hundred times more about Egyptian than I ever will? It is expensive, unnecessary, and not really honest for us to pretend to duplicate the work of firmly established and far better equipped instructors and institutions. Should the Church have a university at all, then? Not, I believe, in the conventional sense. Let me explain.

In an article in the current Jewish Quarterly Review, I refer to the fierce conflict that took place in the first five centuries after Christ between the “literalists” of the Church and the “allegorists,” or, as they called each other, the “anthropomorphists” and the “spiritualizers.”4 The latter were wholly under the sway of the University of Alexandria, and in the end they won a total victory. Ever since then the teachings of the Christian churches have been those of the old pagan universities, for when the Church lost revelation it had to turn to another source for guidance and so threw itself into the arms of the established schools of learning. The schoolmen, as one of them expresses it, took over the office and function once belonging to the prophets and once in power guarded their authority with jealous care, quickly and violently suppressing any suggestion of a recurrent inspiration.

While I was at Berkeley I was asked to speak to a student group on the subject, “Is the University of California anti-religious?” After considerable inquiry I was forced to admit that the Berkeley institution is if anything less antireligious than BYU, where religion is under more conscious and deliberate attack. But I do not for that reason hold my BYU colleagues culpable—they cannot help themselves. By its very nature the university is the rival of the Church; its historic mission has been to supply the guiding light which passed away with the loss of revelation, and it can make no concessions to its absolute authority without forfeiting that authority. In a 1959 series of articles in the Improvement Era, I showed how almost all the opposition to the restoration of the gospel from the beginning came from the intellectuals;5 how else could they react to the return of revelation? After inspecting the great Prussian universities at the peak of their splendor, Orson Spencer reported to Brigham Young that “universities have schooled the people . . . into the nethermost corners of hell.”6 This shocking statement is no more devastating than what Friedrich Nietzsche wrote about the same universities a generation later7 or what a number of German scholars have written about them in our own time: George Steiner blames the universities above all for “such a profound deadness of spirit, such an inescapable sense of triviality and dissimulation,” as has possessed the modern German mind; the university, he says, has “drilled into the German people a terrible weakness for slogans and pompous clichés.”8 Brother Spencer was right after all; and yet those very Prussian schools of which he spoke became the models of our American institutions, and it is their proud, confident, befuddled teachings that still resound in the recesses of Orson Spencer Hall!

I have discussed the supplanting of the gospel by the teaching of the schools (in ancient times, that is) in a number of studies, but to show what I mean, one example close to home will suffice. On 23 March 1955, I engaged in a public discussion in Salt Lake with my friend Sterling McMurrin.9 I closed my rather feeble address with the words, “At this point (i.e., after we have discovered the depths of our own ignorance) we can begin the study of the gospel; there is no further need for waiting around until ‘history’ can make up its mind.” Immediately Sterling (for it was his turn to speak) arose and introduced his own discourse by saying, “Now we will hear the real gospel.” This brought a round of applause from the university crowd—did they realize what it meant? It was a frank declaration that the celebrations of the learned men and not the utterances of the prophets comprise the gospel. This has been the credo of the Christian schoolmen since the days of Clement of Alexandria: the university—Christian, Moslem, Jewish, or pagan—has its own religion, and the basic tenet of that religion is the denial of revelation: “We altogether avoid saying positively and confidently anything which contradicts manifest experiences and the reasoning of philosophy or the other sciences. . . . The truth of the Holy Writ cannot be contrary to the solid reasons and experiences of human knowledge.”10 This naive faith in the infallibility of our present knowledge would make many a modern physicist smile, and it has been shrewdly criticized by C. S. Lewis:

Besides being complicated, reality, in my experience, is usually odd. It is not neat, not obvious, not what you expect. . . . Reality, in fact, is usually something you could not have guessed. That is one of the reasons I believe Christianity. It is a religion you could not have guessed. If it offered us just the kind of universe we had always expected, I should feel we were making it up. . . . It has just that queer twist about it that real things have. So let us leave behind all these boys’ philosophies—these oversimple answers. The problem is not simple and the answer is not going to be simple either. . . . Either this man was, and is, the Son of God: or else a madman or something worse. . . . But let us not come with any patronising nonsense about His being a great human teacher. He has not left that open to us. . . . I am trying here to prevent anyone saying the really foolish thing that people often say about Him: “I’m ready to accept Jesus as a great moral teacher, but I don’t accept His claim to be God.” That is the one thing we must not say. A man who was merely a man and said the sort of things Jesus said would not be a great moral teacher. He would either be a lunatic—on a level with the man who says he is a poached egg—or else he would be the Devil of Hell.11

How well these words apply in a lesser measure to Joseph Smith or any true prophet! What Lewis is here condemning is the very type of thinking that is being so diligently cultivated by our Mormon intellectuals, who must have their religion neat and rational, and who balk at anything in the gospel that could not have sprung from their own minds. A good example of this is Brother Berrett’s honest, persistent, and well-meant efforts to convince our seminary and institute people that God simply cannot have foreknowledge of things, since that, according to an old and threadbare argument, would be incompatible with the free agency of man. That is the party line of the university, the principle stated above by Pererius, that the mind of man always has priority over the word of God. Now those who take this position do so not because they are religious renegades, but simply because it is the only safe position they can take. It is not that they are ashamed of the gospel, but rather that they are abashed in the presence of the learned, intimidated by a situation with which they cannot cope. Again, let me explain.

There are four obvious ways of meeting the challenge of the learned world:

1. We can ignore them. This is often a good idea, since the two greatest nuisances in the Church are (a) those who think they know enough to disprove the claims of Joseph Smith, and (b) those who think they know enough to prove them. Actually, nobody knows nearly enough either to prove or disprove the gospel—“Man cannot by searching find out God” (see Job 11:7). If we ignore the learning of the world, then of course we will have no need for institutions of higher learning.

2. We can run away from them. That is, we can claim to be scholars in the full and proper sense of the word and yet refuse to meet other scholars on their own ground, confining our learned antics to audiences of “our own people.” We at the BYU want the world to accept our academic pretensions, even though we do not begin to come up to its academic standards. We claim special status and immunity as a Church school and yet ask full faith and credit in the world for a brand of education which we will not allow the world to criticize. All this is a form of running away from our scholastic responsibilities. When books and articles against the Church and its teachings have come out in the past, no matter how patently false and unfair they have been, none of the Church’s army of professional scholars has shown any inclination to rush to the defense of the faith, though even a mercenary should show some measure of loyalty to his employer. Why is this so? Those who keep silence when the Church is attacked are neither vicious nor depraved, but they are afraid—they are playing safe in a ticklish situation. For having given out that they are scholars, they must, to save face with the Gentiles and the Saints, steer clear of any situation in which their limitations would be brought to light.

3. We can agree with the world. This has always been standard procedure with our Mormon intellectuals. What else can they do, since they cannot stand up to the opposition and cannot afford to run away? Nothing is more prevalent among the LDS schoolmen than the illusion that they can enroll themselves in the company of the experts and gain their respect and recognition simply by agreeing with whatever they say. Naturally our poorly equipped scholars tend to panic when anyone threatens to substitute serious discussion for professional camaraderie. They have assailed me hysterically for daring to criticize Mrs. Brodie or speak of the Book of Mormon in polite company. And yet I cannot feel to chide them for their timidity—mere prudence admonishes them against rocking the boat in waters where they cannot swim. But the point is that they claim to be expert swimmers and volunteer themselves as lifeguards for all. And so their specious learning has been a source of weakness to the Church. Specious learning? Consider our next point.

4. We can meet the opposition on their own grounds, publishing in their journals (which are open to all) and presenting the clear evidence of the original sources. This is exactly what we have not been doing. We have fondly supposed through the years that we could mask our inadequacy behind the awesome facade of titles and degrees; our intellectuals rest their whole case on that very authoritarianism of rank and protocol which they have always affected to despise. Here, as you know, our most serious weakness has ever been in the field of languages—precisely the field in which the School of the Prophets and the Nauvoo University were particularly strong. All knowledge of the past— historical, philosophical, literary, religious, etc.—comes to us through written texts which (as I showed at length in a number of Era articles in 1955) cannot be critically examined or understood in translation.12 The indispensable key to the past is language, and in our Utah schools we have always affected a unique and intense interest in the ancient world. We have tried to open the lock without the key: only in Utah can you take advanced courses in the fine points of Greek literature from a man who does not know a word of Greek, but who, in the name of scholarship, has driven hundreds of young people from the Church (I have run into them everywhere); only here can you attend public lectures on the Dead Sea Scrolls by savants who cannot read a line of them; only here can you study classical and Near Eastern civilization and thought under experts to whom a line of Horace or the Talmud might as well be Chinese; only here can you listen to discourses on the philology of the Tower of Babel by authorities who know no language but English, and so on and so on—it is unbelievable. I well remember the amazement and delight with which I perused the BYU catalog as I waited for my first interview with President MacDonald. Never had I beheld such a sumptuous offering in classical antiquity; there were advanced courses in Greek and Roman literature, philosophy, religion, archaeology, language, and what-not. “You must have a splendid classical library,” I observed to President MacDonald, who, in his curt blunt way, replied, “The Brigham Young University has no library!” “Come again?” quoth I in astonishment, and he repeated the brutal phrase. At once I rushed to the stacks and discovered that he was right—I found on the shelves just one Greek book (Homer) and one Latin book (Manilius), and I soon found out that nobody in Provo could read a line of either one. Yet we were offering the youth of the Church an unparalleled selection of courses, along with higher degrees, in classical studies. Today we are stronger both in library and in staff, but the grotesque disproportion between our claims and our performance is as great as ever—for now we offer the Ph.D.

The fond illusion that there is an area of mental activity to be designated as advanced study or higher learning is costing us dearly at the BYU. There is no such thing as advanced study. During the past year I studied very hard at Berkeley. Was it advanced study? I was badgered and bullied six hours a week by a fellow twenty years my junior, who was trying to knock the simple elements of Egyptian and Coptic into my head. It was all very elementary: my teacher would say after he had given a particularly brilliant demonstration that any Egyptian child of ten would probably laugh himself sick at our solemn and laborious attempts to reconstruct the language. He knew the whole thing was not on an advanced but a childish level. Anything I don’t happen to know is elementary to me—all learning is elementary. Failure to realize this simple fact has made a fiasco of our graduate work. I have had freshmen and sophomore students who have made phenomenal progress in Greek and Arabic, but it is almost impossible to find a graduate student who will submit to the humiliation of doing simple daily assignments; having imbibed the heady illusion of “advanced studies,” they cannot bring themselves to do the childish exercises without which no one ever learned a language. The faculty members are most to blame for this: I have sat in many a master’s examination in which neither the candidate nor any member of the committee could read a word of the writings they were so learnedly discussing. My last official act before going to Berkeley was to sit in on such an examination, where the candidate had based his thesis on the critical interpretation of a Greek poet whose writing neither he nor any of the committee could read; I asked the young man what he intended to do for his life’s work, and he replied that he wanted to devote himself to the study of ancient history. I suggested that in such a case it would be a good idea for him to learn Greek and Latin, and he agreed. Thereupon a member of the examining committee warmly interposed with the observation that though he himself was “not without some intellectual attainment,” he felt it quite wrong to insist that any student must learn this or that language. Which of us was right? The student went east on a fine scholarship—and promptly came to grief, because he had not had that basic training which his BYU professors had prevented him from getting. I have seen this happen many, many times.

I mention the high cost of poor preparation because of your avowed intention of getting a bread-and-butter degree as quickly as possible and then getting down to real work. Nearly all our serious graduate students have had the same idea, dear brother—but it never works. Like the elder Maeser you are “painting for bread too soon.” You admit that if you had the money you would go elsewhere and get a real degree. They all do. But do you see where that puts us? We are using your financial pressures to force you into buying an inferior product. You speak for others when you protest that you are wasting your time taking required courses that never go very deep and keep you from learning the things you should. Such courses exist in all graduate schools—for the sake of the teachers, not the students. The idea is that a large number of courses and a large staff teaching them make a good college. But forty sparrows do not make an eagle, forty house cats do not make a lion, and forty survey courses do not make a scholar. Moreover, if you bring together forty men, each of whom knows a little Latin or math, the result is not the equivalent of consulting just one person with a good knowledge of those subjects. At present our graduate program has nothing to offer but survey courses. Beware of them.

You want to settle for a “service degree,” and indeed if you got a degree here it would have to be such a one. But such a gimmick is a snare and a delusion; it is a hybrid thing that satisfies nobody and does much harm. In the 1920s the University of Chicago offered such a blessing to ministers who did not intend to become scholars but wanted the dignity of the doctorate to help them in their careers. A throng of eager seekers from Utah got the degree and have kept things stirred up ever since, correcting the views of the Church in history and doctrine in the name of scholarship, though to my knowledge not one of them has ever produced a piece of work acceptable to the learned world to which they claim to belong—some of them didn’t even write dissertations. The trouble with a service degree is that nobody will admit he has one.

But if you try to pass as a scholar on the strength of a degree (to say nothing of a moth-eaten degree like mine!), you will soon find yourself in trouble, making concessions like mad because you can’t deliver the goods. And to vindicate your undignified retreat you will have to do what the rest of them do—you will convince yourself and others that the course you are forced to take is actually the only right and true course for anybody to take; and when others propose to meet the world on its own grounds, you will promptly sound the alarm and attack them as fanatics and troublemakers. And so your whole career will become one long face-saving operation—at the expense of the Church.

Now it is important to understand that the issues I am discussing and which are making so much trouble here at the “Y” are not religious issues at all; they are purely academic. The grim problems which are brought to my office by a steady stream of students could be solved, I believe, without any reference whatever to religion. If only our Mormon professors were required to come up to the standards of really good universities, not in religion but in the subjects they teach, they would soon be too busy to carry on their ideological campaigns; if they could turn their energies into productive channels and meet the hard and exacting requirements of the scholarly community to which they pay such ardent lip service, they would not have to work off their frustrations on helpless students. Perhaps I am being too naive, but the fact is that most of the troubles here stem from the fact that our faculty members are allowed to parade as scholars without being scholars. “Publish or perish” is too mechanical and unimaginative a rule to apply everywhere, but it is not too much to insist on the rule, “Publish or shut up!” It is not the religious views of our professors that drive so many young people from the Church—few are fooled or impressed by the religious contributions of our English or Philosophy Departments, for example—it is the claim to a higher and deeper learning, a knowledge of things that others do not know; that is the weapon. It is the power to impress and beguile others by appealing to a learning that the “layman” does not possess that puts him at the mercy of the professors.

For the past year I have been trying to learn and teach something called classical rhetoric. Rhetoric was “the art of the Sophists,” and the ancient, medieval, and modern universities have all been under their spell. Plato warned against these people and prophesied that they would (as they soon did) gain complete control of education; in his dialogues he has Socrates draw from the great Sophists their admission that what they really seek is not knowledge but the prestige and influence that go with it and that the aim of their art is only to get enough learning to make an impression on the public and thereby get “power and gain.” It can be clearly shown that higher education, especially in the humanities, has faithfully followed the Sophist line ever since Isocrates.

From the beginning the Sophists devoted most of their energies to attacking religion. The professional humanist simply cannot leave religion alone, for in the end he has nothing else to talk about. The philosophers can always get an audience by promising an attack on the Church, but whoever listens to them or reads their stuff when they talk about anything else? They don’t dare apostatize, because if they did the public would lose all interest in them. To attack religion is the one safe course for the ambitious intellectual. A professional savant is expected to say something significant—it is not enough for him simply to repeat what others are saying. And so he strikes out in bold new directions by attacking prevailing religious beliefs. Of course in doing so he falls back on platitudes and truisms and arguments as old as the race (you will find them all in the Book of Mormon), but since he is in the minority, this marks him as a great thinker and above all saves him from being called to account; for if he is too closely questioned or criticized, he can always play the martyred liberal. I am not making this all up, Brother Burgon; what I am describing is the normal behavior of the ancient Sophists. Even in those societies in which genuine religious belief had been effectively stamped out, and at those schools where no one for generations had dreamed of being anything but a liberal and a skeptic, and in those communities where no one dared breathe a word against the doctors, they still depicted themselves as crusading heroes of the mind. So let us not be too hard on our local profs, who expend their powers in attacks on the Church—they are simply following the established ways of their profession.

What, then, should you and I do? Return, I say, to the program of the School of the Prophets and the University of Nauvoo, which was the acquisition of basic knowledge (especially languages) for the avowed purpose of aiding the spreading of the gospel. At once an agonized cry goes up from the faculty: “How can you be so narrow, so biased, so prejudiced as to begin your researches by assuming that you already have the truth!” While in Berkeley I got a letter from a BYU professor who gave me to know that because I believe the Book of Mormon I am not really qualified to teach history, and who ended his harangue with the observation that while I claim to know the truth, the gentlemen of the History Department, like true scholars, claim only to be searching for it. A noble sentiment, truly, but a phony one—are they really searching? For one thing, they don’t believe for a moment that the truth of the gospel can be found and have only loud cries of rage and contempt for any who say they have found it—they are as sure that it doesn’t exist as we are that it does; which is to say, our dedicated searchers for truth are dead sure that they have the answer already! As if to prove that they have no intention of pursuing serious investigations, these people have conspicuously neglected to prepare themselves for any but the most localized research; they are like a man setting out to explore a wonderful cavern without bothering to equip himself with either lights or ropes. We respect our local Gelehrten (learned) for that knowledge and proficiency which they have demonstrated to the world, but when they go out of bounds and attack the Church with specious learning, they invite legitimate censure. They are like dentists who insist on performing delicate brain surgery because that is more interesting than filling teeth. Nice for them—but what about their patients?

My colleagues in Berkeley gave me a bad time about this, and it was your letter to Professor Baer that started it all. For Baer promptly got hold of a BYU catalog and the cat was out of the bag. I was assailed by questions from him and others—ironically, the same questions I had raised vainly through the years: What on earth is meant by “Biblical and Semitic Languages?” Don’t you know that all Semitic languages are biblical, and that there are at least a hundred other biblical languages? How can Egyptian be taught by “Staff” when there are only four or five qualified teachers of Egyptian in all America? How can Church History and Biblical Languages be lumped together as a required minor when they deal with totally different materials? What are these fantastic courses in archaeology? You know that even a teaching assistant may not instruct in a field of archaeology in which he has not both excavated and published. Classical and biblical archaeology are highly specialized subjects— what is this nonsense about “General Classical and Biblical Archaeology?” Here are a hundred other highly specialized fields—we know all the men working in those fields, for they are few in number and keep in constant contact with each other: how does it happen that none of your men are among them? We understand that you have a duty to your own people, but before you can instruct them you are under a moral obligation to prove to them and to us that you can meet our standards. If you expect us to respect your degrees why don’t you establish communication with us? Instead of offering all these high-sounding courses as a demonstration of competence, why don’t you first demonstrate your competence the hard way, so that you can honestly offer the courses? These and endless other questions all point up our great weakness—trying to begin at the top: the BYU began, I am told, as “the world’s greatest university.”

Thus our fame is spreading and we are in intimate danger of acquiring a reputation as an asylum for quacks. While the BYU was an obscure college in the sticks nobody cared particularly what wild claims we made. But now we are breaking into the big leagues and demanding attention and respect. This is far riskier business than many people seem to think, for once a university gets a reputation, good or bad, nothing on earth can change it—the reputation will stick for centuries, no matter how the school may change for better or worse. I have noted ample indication that the world resents our ambition and wants to see us fail. Since we are on the spot academically, we ignore the strictest academic standards (and how we ignore them!) at our peril. Even the most skillful public relations will only backfire in the end.

So, my advice to you is not to get a quick degree. In time you will find out that the hard way is the only easy way. After our division of religion has given the world a few hundred books and articles in the proper places, we might start to think of offering higher degrees. But, I ask myself, is it worth all the trouble? It is not. My own conviction is that the Lord does not intend the BYU to become a great university in the conventional sense. The constitution of the Church as set forth in the Doctrine and Covenants gives no place to a university. And why should it? A university is a substitute for the church; its doctorate is a substitute for the priesthood; its discussions and techniques a substitute for revelation; its robes and rituals a substitute for lost ordinances. It is a second best, but it is sworn to defend its priority against all comers and insist that it alone has the true gospel. No wonder there are tensions! The university has dictated doctrine and policy to every church that has sponsored it, and the churches of the world have listened to its voices only for a lack of a better guide. The true Church needs no such crutch to lean on. Our young people are desperately in need of knowledge that neither the “life adjustment” experiments of the educationists nor the posturings of our self-certified experts can supply. You have been looking for some of that knowledge and found your access to it constantly blocked. For the present I can only advise you either to go where you can find it or start looking for something else. But whatever you do, don’t try to build something out of nothing by the manipulation of credits and courses. We all need to be learning constantly, but “higher learning” is the illusion of those that are lost.

Notes

^1. Burton v. Crowell Publishing Co., 82 F.2d 154, 155 (2d Cir. 1936).

^2. Berg v. Printers’ Ink Publishing Co., 54 F. Supp. 795, 797 (District Court, S.D., New York, 1943).

^3. Cf. Recognitions of Clement 2.17, 3.62.

^4. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Christian Envy of the Temple,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1987), 392–93; originally published in the Jewish Quarterly Review 50 (1959–60): 99.

^5. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Mixed Voices: A Study of Book of Mormon Criticism,” in The Prophetic Book of Mormon, CWHN 8 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1989), 127–206.

^6. Orson Spencer, “The Prussian Mission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints” (Liverpool: Richards, 1853), 14.

^7. Friedrich Nietzsche, The Twilight of the Idols (New York: Russell and Russell, 1964), 52, originally published in 1889.

^8. George Steiner, Language and Silence: Essays on Language, Literature, and the Inhuman (New York: Atheneum, 1976), 96–97.

^9. This public discussion took place in the Orson Spencer Hall on the University of Utah campus.

^10. Galileo, quoting Pererius (16th century), in Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo, trans. Stillman Drake (Garden City, NY: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1957), 186 (emphasis added).

^11. C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Macmillan, 1952), 47–48, 55–56.

^12. See Hugh W. Nibley, “The Way of the Church,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1987), 209–322.

18

Dear Sterling

This widely circulated letter to Sterling M. McMurrin, 23 August 1967, was reprinted in Boyd J. Petersen, Hugh Nibley: A Consecrated Life (Salt Lake City: Kofford Books, 2002), 427–30.

Dear Sterling,

I have been away—first visit to southern California in twenty years—so here we are back again and forced to think about a religious philosophy.1 I can see that there would be a place for my peculiar views in your interesting Roman salad if only for contrast: “If a man will comprehend the richness and variety of the universe,” wrote A. E. Housman, “and inspire his mind with a due measure of wonder and of awe, he must contemplate the human intellect not only in its heights of genius but in its abysses of ineptitude.”2 Let that be my passport to your august company while I list, in no particular order, a few propositions that express my religious position at the moment.

Proposition No. 1. We are participating in a vivid little drama being enacted in empty space. If blind chance can set this stage, put the characters on it, and set the plot in motion, then there is nothing that blind chance cannot do, including the staging of innumerable other plays on other worlds; and blind chance may very well have arranged to have this particular world quarantined to provide a testing situation in which we find ourselves—strained and awkward, but just the test for those particular qualities which are going to be needed in the really long run.

Proposition No. 2. Blind chance isn’t a force at all, but a term, denoting an unknown X. Just as Newton could never bring himself to believe that gravity could be a force operating across a completely empty gap, so I can’t believe in a directing force which is itself completely without any sense of direction or an organizing force which itself has no concept of organization. That idea stopped even Darwin, you may recall.

Proposition No. 3. From the tiny segment of the play I have studied, I like to think that things have been following the script recommended by Joseph Smith more closely than the other scripts written by scientists and scholars and altered from time to time. I really believe that the unfolding of the human comedy has shown a consistent tendency to adhere to the ancient script, and at present gives every indication of following it out to the bitter or glorious end.

For me, religion to be convincing must be nonspeculative. If it were the sort of thing we could figure out for ourselves, I would strongly suspect that we had invented it (C. S. Lewis). Mormonism has the great virtue of being, along with Judaism, early Christianity, and Islam, a non-speculative religion. It accepts the moral law within and also the starry heavens above, the latter being something we do not make up ourselves and yet somehow is part of the religious picture.

My present religious mood is an all-out literalism. If the history of Christianity has been one long undignified retreat, one continual process of accommodation to the science of the hour (Whitehead), the time has come to reverse the process, since the science of the hour has brought us to a most dismal slough in which it is no delight to dwell (Kozyrev). If the discussion is to be kept alive, it must move away from its old perennial game of de-mythologizing and de-eschatologizing in the opposite direction, which I call derhetoricizing. So today, just for kicks, I read the scriptures as if everything in them was meant to be taken in the most literal sense, as if no such thing as a symbol, allegory, or type even existed. And in doing that I find that there begins to build up within my personal computer a mass of data that has a totally different power and thrust from anything I have known before. Granted that the new deposit in its naive literalism will in time need radical correction, still I am convinced that the correction will not have to be nearly so radical as that required by the opposite view, that of the doctors of the Church, who insisted on reading the scriptures as if nothing in them was to be taken literally and instructed their students never to give a literal interpretation to a passage if any other interpretation was possible.

I deplore the authoritarian, Baconian structure on which the entire edifice of modern learning is built (the school-men are even worse than the churchmen—when they are not actually the same) and have always been a passionate devotee of the open-ended discussion in which nothing is ever proven except for the individual. Whenever anything is proven, it is because some individual has been convinced, having acquired a personal, noncommunicable testimony of the truth of the proposition (Popper).

A testimony is a gift and a talent (1 Corinthians 12:7–11); man muss ein Organ dafür haben (a person must have a sense organ for it). It functions like any of the senses; for example, like hearing, it is an “absolute” thing—you either have it or you don’t; but like hearing, it may be strong at one time and weak at another; it is never in ailing mortals in perfect operating condition (Heraclitus) and may vanish altogether at times, be nonoperative at times, and at times return with astonishing force and vigor. But it does not produce the things it hears. It would be hard to explain to one devoid of those senses that seeing and hearing are not functions of the imagination and are only in part self-induced—that there would be no seeing and hearing at all if some sort of stimulus did not come from the outside (Kantish). All this is commonplace enough, but I am trying to say that when I “bear my testimony” I am really talking about something, whether you get it or not.

We are here to use our brains, but the most important impressions that come to us do so directly and without any conscious cerebration. We may work over the data of such experiences in our minds, but we do not produce the impressions in the first place. An interview with John the Baptist led Oliver Cowdery to declare that whatever the doings of men may be, “one ray of glory from the upper world, or one word from the mouth of the Savior, from the bosom of eternity, strikes it all into insignificance, and blots it forever from the mind.”3 I have not had Oliver Cowdery’s experience, but I have had some like it, and this puts any discussion of my religious “philosophy” on a difficult plane. For if I were to tell you that on a particular day I had such and such an experience, you would write me down as a mental case, and rightly so, in case you had not had the same experience or one like it. I see no reason why I should prejudice and offend you by telling you stories you can’t believe and have no means of testing. But such experiences as I refer to are bound to affect one’s behavior if only in subtle ways, and I find for one thing that there are some things that I simply cannot take seriously and other things which I must take seriously even at the risk of giving offense to my more rational colleagues. It is surprising how many people have thought me to be merely spoofing—just having a little fun, like Joseph Smith when he got up the Book of Mormon. I wonder if they realize what a price one must pay for that kind of fun. I say to hell with careers and the things of the world; but if I thought there was the remotest possibility that this was my only life and my only world I would most assuredly not say it, and I would not throw away invitations to serious accomplishment for the sake of a monotonous series of pranks.

I include acceptance of the gospel among the basic bodily functions like sleeping, eating, and breathing. They are not rational but spontaneous; without them we would die, but that is not why we engage in them. We eat, breathe, and sleep long before we are in danger of dying of hunger, suffocation, or exhaustion; if we had to have a rational explanation for doing those things before we were willing to invest any effort in them we would not be long for this world. The eye it cannot choose but see, l’âme pense toujours (but the soul always thinks), and as far as I can see, faith is inseparable from the awareness of existence. Existence, the Egyptians said, is a marvel compared with which all other marvels pale into insignificance: it is something not to be explained but accepted; and to accept it is to feel a surge of gratitude—to what, for what? We cannot shake off the wonder and delight of being, the indefinite prolongation of which is but a minor problem once we have got over the original obstacle—namely, the enormous odds against existing at all. Our reaction to being here must be a religious one, because the only principle of continued being is holiness. One cannot maintain an even level of folly. Each act is a step downward unless it is a righteous act, and the concept of righteousness cannot be divorced from the idea of holiness.

I have written too much and said too little. This is no religious philosophy at all. It is a situation in which I find myself: I am stuck with the gospel. I know perfectly well that it is true; there may be things about the Church that I find perfectly appalling—but that has nothing to do with it.

I know the gospel is true.

Yours as ever, Hugh Nibley

If all this sounds trite, I can’t help it.

Notes

^1. Sterling M. McMurrin was at the time working on a book of essays on Mormon philosophy that would feature the views of Orson Pratt, W. H. Chamberlin, B. H. Roberts, E. E. Erickson, Hugh Nibley, and W. P. Read. McMurrin had apparently invited Nibley to contribute an essay. The book that McMurrin envisioned was never published.

^2. A. E. Housman, 1903 preface to his Manilius; see Selected Prose, ed. John Carter (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1961), 23.

^3. Oliver Cowdery, Messenger and Advocate 1 (October 1834): 16; reprinted in Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:71, note.

19

The Faith of an Observer: Conversations with Hugh Nibley

This is a transcript of a film coproduced in 1985 by Brigham Young University and the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies for Nibley’s 75th birthday. It has been lightly edited from the spoken word for clarity.

Hugh Nibley: Twenty-three years ago today—if you will cast your minds back—on this same occasion, I gave the opening prayer in which I said, “We have met here today clothed in the black robes of a false priesthood.” (Laughter.) Now, many have asked me since then whether I really said such a shocking thing, but nobody has ever asked what I meant by it. Why not? Well, some knew the answer already, and as for the rest, we do not question things at the BYU. (Laughter and applause.) Well, never expected that!1

Truman G. Madsen (professor of philosophy, BYU): There have been some things said about Brigham Young University by others; none of them are as painfully critical as what Nibley occasionally says, and the same goes for certain aspects of the Church, institutionally speaking. He really is its gadfly critic.

Elder Neal A. Maxwell (Council of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints): And Hugh, of course, is above the fray, not in the sense of his being esoteric or highly advanced, but because his commitment is so visible and has been so pronounced and so repetitively stated that that’s not even the issue. So then we get on to “What is Hugh saying?”

Sloan Nibley (brother): Does he still talk so fast that no one can understand what he’s saying?

Madsen: No one knows what he knows, and that of course also is a problem with knowing him.

Phyllis Nibley (wife): Sometimes I think I don’t know him at all.

Maxwell: I’m just grateful that Hugh Nibley wasn’t buried somewhere in the Middle Ages, in some monastic assignment that he would have performed with his brilliance. I’m grateful, instead, that he has been preserved to be here in the dispensation of the fulness of times when there could be a full flowering of his genius and his ability put at the disposal of the kingdom. And Hugh Nibley, in his field, would be the most remarkable scholar we have. He is so focused on the things that matter, and is so spiritually submissive, that he’s impatient with mediocrity. He’s impatient with irrelevance; and to the casual eye, that may be seen as eccentricity, when in fact I think it’s a reflection of his deepened discipleship.

Sloan Nibley: You just have to take Hugh for what he is and let him drift.

Madsen: Is he a cynic and a pessimist, with all kinds of negative things to say? Yes. Is he an optimist, an idealist, with great hope for the future? Yes. Some would say you can’t get those together. He does.

Hugh Nibley: I never thought of myself as a participant, but always on the sidelines, always looking on, and always finding myself in a position where I could get a rather good look. But everybody’s in that position if they just want to take it and realize what they are into. We’re wandering around as strangers looking for things to recognize, and whenever you see something which you know is good, true, and beautiful, that’s an act of recognition. And you recognize it as such not by analyzing it, but it comes to your memory; it hits you: “I’ve seen that, I know that’s right,” and so forth.

[Muttering to himself at Edfu:] I’m still looking; I’m still looking for it. Darn, darn. Wait a minute. They’ve got it hidden around here somewhere. I want to see . . . just give me one little LC [lion couch] here and I’ll be thankful, but, no, that won’t do it. Let’s look for it . . . sidi, sidi, sidi . . . sidi, firashweno? [Arabic: “Sir, is there a bed or a couch here?”] Yes, we know that this is sidi, but that’s not the question. Attyir fouq? [“Is the bird above?”] Ma firash? [“What is a couch?”]2 Desperately searching for it here . . . this is the search for the hypocephalus. Let’s see now. They just started to carve this. They haven’t done anything here. Don’t see it there. Now let me see, is it here? I’ve got to look at the other wall here. That means we’ll jump down a ways. Good-bye; I’ll see you.

Instead of the “Passionate Pilgrim,”3 we could call it the “Puzzled Pilgrim.” That’s what I’ve considered myself: as a puzzled pilgrim going on a pilgrimage. I wonder what the hell I’m looking at.

On His Childhood and Attitudes toward Wealth

My earliest memory is of running away from home. . . . I remember that day when I was three and ran away. I remember everything that happened that day because I was trying to figure it out. I was determined—I had to run away, I had to find out what was up there. I used to walk along 24th, 25th Street; it used to go up the hill. And there it was in the distance, and it was usually raining or something like that, but there would be a rainbow there, or Mt. Hood,4 or something. I would just ache to know what was up there. I couldn’t stand it any longer. I had to know what was beyond that street, you know.

Reid Nibley (brother): It just always seemed to be there. He had this curiosity, an intense curiosity about everything. Making telescopes in high school.

Sloan Nibley: In the middle of the night, I remember, more than once he would wake me up at three o’clock in the morning and tell me that Venus or somebody was having an occlusion. And I didn’t care to see it particularly; I didn’t give a hoot.

Hugh Nibley: I think I would show off how much I knew and this sort of thing; I was prone to show off, that’s true. An insufferable little show-off, I’ll say that.

Reid Nibley: Hugh was always allowed to do his thing. We sort of worked around Hugh. Things moved around Hugh. I’m sure Mother arranged things around Hugh.

Phyllis Nibley: When he was a child he had a whole suite of rooms all to himself. He was given very special treatment. He was her favorite, and I think he suffered for it. Hugh’s father tried to be a businessman like his father, Charles W. Nibley. Charles W. Nibley was one of the richest and most successful businessmen in the Church. He was a presiding bishop for many years and a counselor in the First Presidency. He had three wives and three families.

Hugh Nibley: Was it you who was up in Logan the other day and saw that palace he built for one of his wives? He built these for his three wives, these palatial mansions. He didn’t want his kids to grow up in poverty, and they didn’t. The result was they were all spoiled rotten—had anything they wanted. And if they had to wait five minutes for money, they were furious, and so forth and so on. And he thoroughly enjoyed distributing it around. That is the only reason he wanted to make it, so he could throw it around. He liked to see everybody happy. He thought that’s the thing that would make them happy, and it certainly did put on a show. I always knew it was there; we could always joke about him and so forth because my grandfather joked about it. He tried to laugh it off, you know, as you’ve seen in the letters. He talks playfully about filthy lucre and this, that, and the other, but it really worried him, considerably.

Madsen: I keep telling him, your grandfather gave the Church $500,000! Do you think it would’ve been better if he hadn’t? He almost talks like a Franciscan: “It’d be better if we were all poor. Then you wouldn’t be tempted to think God gave it to us, and we could use it the way we want to. God didn’t give it to us, and if he did, honorably, then we’d better use it for him, and not for feathering our own nest.” Boy he’s tough on that.

Hugh Nibley: I think it was that last talk I had with Grandpa. I went to see Grandpa Nibley, and that was just before he died. He had a suite on the top floor of the Hotel Utah. He said, “Do you see that window there?” Considering the things he’d done in his life, he said, “If an angel were to come through that door, I would jump right out that window. I wouldn’t hesitate. I’d go right through that window.” He couldn’t face an angel; he was talking about the culture shock of meeting an angel and so forth. And that was our parting conversation—the last words to me. Then we said good-bye, and so forth. But that left it with me. Here he was in the First Presidency, had been presiding bishop for all those years, and yet he says now that he could not face an angel, and it had been because—we’d been talking about it—because of the things he had to do in the way of business. So I don’t have much choice.

Paul Springer (attorney, San Francisco): Money’s never meant much of anything to Hugh, that I could see. That’s the last thing he would think about.

Hugh Nibley: But this is “the root of all evil,” which I say is a very—well, the word is philarguria (1 Timothy 6:10). And philarguria does not mean “love of money.” We say, “Well, I don’t actually love money; I like to have it; I want it, and so forth,” but philarguria is simply “the desire to be rich.” Philarguria is the desire for money in the bank, which we all have, and that’s the root of evil. “Do you have any money?” “Yes, we have sufficient for our needs.” There’s nothing wrong with having sufficient, but, he says, “it’s wanting more, that’s the thing”—because more than enough is more than enough. If you don’t need it, you don’t need it. I mean, how it could be clearer I don’t know.

Paul Springer: The mere accumulating it for the sake of accumulating it was something that wouldn’t occur to him. He had no dislike of it; he just didn’t think about it. It’s a wonderful way to be, they say.

Hugh Nibley: I mean, people want things; they start wanting things. You start wanting things, and there’s no end. And you’re tempted: first you must own this, and you must own that, and then, of course—the Book of Mormon puts this beautifully—come the rivalries and the bitterness, ending finally in murders, and so forth. It builds up there. But with the temptation and then the snare, you’re caught in the rapids and into many foolish desires for things. Lust, epithumia, is desire to possess something, to lust after. That’s a good strong word to use. We associate it with sex, but it doesn’t mean that. It means I’ve got to have that; I’ve set my heart on that; I’ve got to have a new Mercedes; or something like that. Those [thoughts] are foolish, and they’re hurtful. “And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God” (Matthew 19:24; cf. Mark 10:25; Luke 18:25). This is a parable, a Sprichwort, and it was an expression for the impossible. A camel through the eye of a needle is absolutely impossible. The apostles are amazed at that. They didn’t know of any postern gate through which you went [nor of] the idea that a rich man must shed his riches to go through the eye of the needle, and this, that, and the other. You see, it can’t be done except by a special miracle from God, a special dispensation. When his disciples heard it, they were, notice, absolutely knocked over. They were astounded; they didn’t know, as I say, of any other possible explanation. They really took it literally. It says here— it’s a weak translation—but it says they were “exceedingly amazed” (Matthew 19:25).5 They were absolutely astounded and bewildered that he would say it’s impossible for a rich man to get into heaven, saying, “Who then can be saved?” But you’re not going to get into the kingdom of heaven, or Zion on this earth if you’re encumbered with riches; it can’t be done.6

On the Environment and Man’s Dominion

Sloan Nibley: We went on a few trips with my father up in the backwoods around Crater Lake and places like that. He was always up before dawn, and he always saw two or three bears. Of course we laughed at him because he was always seeing bears, until I got up one morning and went out—the first thing I did was run into a bear. So, we figured that he saw the bears, all right.

Hugh Nibley: I went up to Crater Lake because we’d lived in Medford [Oregon] and I’d always wanted to go back to Crater Lake. I spent six weeks or more than that there,7 and I walked up through the Umpqua Forest, and really those times were very wild—no roads or anything—bears all over the place and the like. Very naive—I’d read the Concord School8 and thought that all you had to do was go back to nature, and I really believed that, so I took a bag of wheat and some raisins and I lived on little red huckleberries and got myself terribly sick on too much of those things, you know.

Sloan Nibley: He explored a lot around Crater Lake. I think he swam out to an island there that was in that ice water. I don’t know why he did it; I guess just because he enjoyed it.

Reid Nibley: We went down and spent a weekend on the beach sleeping on the sand and listening to the seals bark all night long, and we wandered up and down the coast. Whatever he saw would sort of unwrap his tongue, and he would start talking. You know, whether it was a seashell, or a wave pattern, or the color of the sand, or whatever it was.

Hugh Nibley: If Grandpa Nibley sees only the feet of timber in a forest and that’s all it is to him, he is not having a fulness of joy or the fulness of the earth. For example, in 1925, I worked all summer in the Nibley-Stoddard Lumber Company in Cromberg, California, on the Feather River. My job was on the bull chain. I had these big things to throw— it was tough work all day long. Ten hours a day, six days a week. The purpose of this bull chain was to pile up all the excess lumber to burn. Well, everything that wasn’t absolutely square from the middle of the log was trimmed off and sent down this bull chain, cut off into sections, taken to the pile, and burned. The whole thing—this enormous pile of timber—was burning day and night. Of course, today that’d be worth millions, all that, just as firewood, if nothing else; but it was good wood. They didn’t bother to save anything . . . took the quickest possible profits from the redwoods. What did they take? Only the hearts of the redwoods for railroad ties.

That was something to see this destruction going on— “that I may murder and get gain” (Moses 5:31; cf. Helaman 6:17–23). This was a form of murder; I mean this was taking life of various sorts. Because remember—and this is a doctrine we do not emphasize—that we believe that all living things are spiritual beings too and shall have the resurrection; we’re told that. But this wanton business to pervert them. Remember the Mahan principle: “I am . . . master of this great secret, that I may murder and get gain” (Moses 5:31). But these things are to be enjoyed, and they want to be enjoyed legitimately.

If you’re fasting, you’re not going to plunder. You’re not going to waste. You’re going to appreciate what’s there. You’re going to have a chance to enjoy it to the full and with cheerful hearts and countenances. We’re missing the fulness of the earth if we don’t do that. Then you consider the things to be thankful for, and you immediately become aware of the beauties of the world and the delights around you—the delights of nature and so forth and the pleasures of the flesh that you can enjoy. Merely breathing, merely drinking. Remember that marvelous character in Thomas Mann’s Zauberberg, Mynheer Peeperkorn, the fabulously rich Dutchman who looked for everything you could find to bring delight. And finally he ends up with the Haben und Gaben des Lebens— “the simple, noble gifts of life.” He could take more joy in a glass of water than he could in a glass of the most costly wine. This is simply das Haben, the noble, simple gifts of life. Well, you find joy in those things, but only when you’re fasting. Only when you distract your mind from all this other trash and tripe and jungle and concerns and impressions that are being made, and what we look like, and so forth. You forget all that when you fast. Then you can really start enjoying everything about you and the whole situation then becomes marvelous, and then the heavens declare the glory of God. You only become aware of that when you’re fasting, when you’re abstracting your mind from normal concerns.

On Education

Hugh Nibley: A very interesting thing happened when I was in Berkeley during a sabbatical. I was teaching there.9 One student came to me. His name was Brown—a very fine young man. He had a problem. And this is the liberal Berkeley crowd, you know. “How can I break the news to my parents that I really believe there is a God?” But here [at BYU] I’m not subversive. I can get away with anything here because I can back it up with the scriptures. Here I can quote the scriptures freely. I’m going to bring that in no matter what. This is the only place I don’t have to apologize for it. Even in school here teaching, the teacher cannot teach you at all. He’s there to save you time. And when you bear your testimony, that is what you do, you don’t twist anybody’s arm or force them to believe. Now I believe, so you better believe or else! Well that’s utterly meaningless. In other words, then, you’re saying, “Well, what good does it do to say, ‘I believe’? How will that affect another person?”

It’s the same way with the written word. It will move some people very deeply and of course have no effect on others. Or the mere understanding of the written word, which is a mystery—after all, nobody knows how that takes place.10 Writing itself is—as Galileo says—the most marvelous device ever invented. He says no invention will ever approach writing for sophistication and the marvelous things it does—to transfer knowledge, the most delicate nuances of knowledge, and feeling and emotion over thousands of years through any distance in space. It beats any TV or anything else you could possibly devise. It’s marvelous! And do that, he says, with 24, 26 little symbols, very simple designs; that does the whole thing. And what a marvelous thing that was. That’s given by the finger of the Lord. But to work it, you have to know what’s going on; you have to read into it. Unless you know what you are reading, you can’t read it.

Paul Springer: I met him when he was at Cal [University of California at Berkeley] in 1933. He was then a grad student. I forget what he was working on then, some absurd thing. One thing about him—he didn’t give a damn for a degree.

Hugh Nibley: A university is nothing more nor less than a place to show off. And that’s what they are doing. Everybody is consciously acting a role there. Everybody’s after eminence. That’s their objective. Their whole objective is eminence. They have nothing else to live for. It’s the predicament of Faust in the opening act of Faust. There Faust says: “Heiße Magister. Heiße Doktor”—“I’m called now ‘master’; I’m called even a ‘doctor,’ and here I am, and I’ve been fooling people all these years.” So Faust—the greatest, most learned man in the world—decides there is nothing left to do but commit suicide because it’s a fake; the whole thing is a fraud. Well, that’s when you bring the university and the scholarship and theology together. So the devil appears and he makes his bargain and so forth as a result. Scholarship clothed in the robes of authority—that’s why they’re the “black robes of the false priesthood.”

There is no such thing as having an education at all. No, “education” means a formal line of training, but there is such a thing as a terminal degree. To have an education—that’s an utter absurdity. It’s all becoming business and law now. Well, that’s it—that’s the thing to do. So that’s what an education is. But that’s not where your learning and knowledge really come from. It’s the gospel of repentance, and it’s progressive repentance. “Wherefore, . . . thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore” (Moses 5:8). And “forevermore” means it’s progressive repentance to realize where your weakness is. Now that’s a humiliating process. It’s one people can’t put up with. It’s a progressive revelation of your own ignorance as you go on to solve a problem. When the great Scaliger,11 for example, the greatest scholar who ever lived, was learning Hebrew, he went to the ghetto and the children made fun of him, correcting his Hebrew, which was very crude. And scholars wouldn’t speak to him. They were indignant. He was willing to humiliate himself and “become as a little child.” Unless you become as a little child, you are not intelligent; you’re stupid. And they mocked it because of their haughtiness and their pride; and that pride is stupidity—that is what it is. But I’ve noticed that all along. As students we were so blessedly ignorant, so horribly ignorant, and the teacher—you’re declared a Ph.D. when you still don’t know anything and from then on you go on teaching and you begin to pontificate from that moment—still doesn’t know anything.

No matter how sharply you focus on a particular subject, or how highly you specialize, you miss most of it, no matter what it is, so that no person has the same experiences or reaction as the others. You see a different thing. Everyone’s seeing is selective—and mine has been. I select certain things and completely bypass others to an astonishing degree. I think if you live right and keep your mind open—if you ask for revelation and so forth and your mind is open— you will receive hints and proddings that are stronger than just normal insights and things like that, things that are very strong sometimes.

On Faith and Testimony

Paul Springer: The one thing that he has that I would give anything to have is the gift of absolute faith. He has it. And this you can’t acquire. You either have it or you don’t. He has it and I don’t. We used to talk about that in terms of Faust. You know that famous line—Die Botshaft höre ich wohl, allein mir fehlt der Glaube: “I hear the message well, but I don’t have the faith.”12

Question: Did you always have a testimony of the gospel?

Hugh Nibley: Except for one short period—when the bottom of the world fell out. That was desperate. But ah . . .

Question: When was that?

Hugh Nibley: It quickly came back with a bang. I was terribly bothered about this afterlife business and that sort of thing. I had no evidence for that whatever. And I remember I went up to Mt. Wilson13 at that time. I walked around in the snow and brooded about it, and I came back. We had a meeting at the old Hollywood Ward. Matthew Cowley’s father was the speaker that night. So I went up to meet Brother Cowley, and as soon as he took my hand, he said, “Come with me, I want to give you a blessing.” The blessing was that the Lord would give me an answer immediately to the thing that had been puzzling my mind. Within the week I had an appendicitis attack, and so we went to the old Seventh-day Adventist hospital out in Loma Linda and had the appendix taken out.

Phyllis Nibley: As I understand it, he swallowed his tongue and actually was at one time technically dead. Of course they realized what had happened and worked frantically and brought him back. But during that period he had one of these life-after-death experiences very much like the ones that Dr. Moody describes.14

Hugh Nibley: Then all of a sudden down this thing like a tube, you know, you get sucked down this thing and you come out. [I thought,] Oh, boy, I know everything, and everything is there, and this is what I wanted to know! Three cheers, and all this sort of thing. I started solving problems and everything else, and then they found the resuscitator. The doctor says I talked to him all during the operation. I said: “Just because I can’t move now, it looks as if I wasn’t feeling this, but it hurts so much worse than I can describe. It’s real, all right.” I talked with him the whole time during that thing, and Dr. Wayland talked about that. He’d never seen anybody do anything like that. But all I wanted was to know whether there was anything on the other side. When I came out there, I didn’t meet anything or anybody else, but I looked around, and not only was I in possession of all my faculties, but they were tremendous. I was light as a feather and ready to go. Above all, I was interested in problems. I’d missed a lot of math and stuff like that. Now in five minutes I would be able to make up for that. Remember, as Joseph Smith said, “If you could look for five minutes into yonder heavens,” you can forget about all the rest you ever bothered about.15

That gives me a great relief, so that’s why I don’t take this very seriously down here. We’re just sort of dabbling around, playing around, being tested for our moral qualities, and above all the two things that we can be good at, and no two other things can we do: We can forgive and we can repent. It’s the gospel of repentance. We’re told that the angels envy men their ability both to forgive and to repent because they can’t do either. But nobody’s very clever, nobody’s very brave, nobody’s very strong, nobody’s very wise. We’re all pretty stupid. Nobody’s very anything. We’re not tested in those things, but in the things the angels envy us for—we can forgive and we can repent. So three cheers, let’s start repenting as of now.

On War and Politics

Reid Nibley: Oh, I can remember very clearly one day he had a huge steamer trunk which was filled with shoeboxes which contained his note cards, and he was going through this and either filing or setting them up somehow. And mother said, “What on earth are you doing that for?” He said, “Oh I’m just getting ready; I’ll be going to war.” This was some years before the war broke out. But he had sized that up pretty early.

Hugh Nibley: My first assignment—it was so typically army you must hear about it: It was the eve of Thanksgiving, and I was scrubbing toilets out with a big brush, with a big scrubbing brush. I was busy scrubbing these latrines out and so forth, and an officer came to me and said, “Come with me and bring the brush.” There was a huge pile of celery; they were preparing it for the officers’ mess the next day. He said, “Clean this celery off.” I said, “But this brush . . . I just used it for cleaning toilets!” “That doesn’t make any difference, if it looks shiny and clean, that’s the army; that’s all we want to know.” So there I was cleaning that celery with a toilet brush for the officers for their Thanksgiving dinner the next day. That’s so typically army. I mean it’s marvelous, you know, and it just goes on.

Lucien Goldschmidt (rare book dealer, New York City): Camp Ritchie was set up to train people for Intelligence Service—G-2 service. There never were more than, I think, eleven or twelve hundred people at the camp. We were in the same class in Ritchie, and this was the German class. There’s Hugh Nibley himself in the third row, the second person from the left [next page].

Hugh Nibley: But they were all these famous men. Lots of them were great musicians, artists, and so forth. That’s where I met Lucien.

Goldschmidt: I would think that I on the whole was more optimistic about the president and some of his intentions than Hugh Nibley might have been. He was often pessimistic. He altogether regarded that we were at the end of the times and that more disasters were ahead of us. Hugh Nibley decided that he would not like to be an interrogator. The idea of pressing other soldiers who were under orders not to reveal information, and to press them to reveal it, seemed morally unpleasant to him. He therefore went into that section called “Order of Battle,” in which the purpose was to know what forces were facing any one of the sections of our army.

Figure 1. The German class at Camp Ritchie, Maryland. High Nibley is the second person from the left in the third row, and Lucien Goldschmidt is the third person from the right in the first row. Courtesy of Marguerite Goldschmidt.

Hugh Nibley: Now OB [Order of Battle] teams were to be attached only to army groups. That was as high and safe as you could get, with one exception. So when we were in London we received our assignments. I remember Weigner came out; he was up on the top floor late at night at the British War Office there (they had a special wooden structure built up there because they didn’t have enough space in this little dark hall). We were standing there waiting for the judgment, and Braun went in—he was our lieutenant and spoke with a very thick German accent—to get the assignments. They were going to give the assignments to all of them. And we were it, we were the one who would not be attached to an army group. We would be attached to the 101st Airborne Division. We would be the first to land in Normandy. We would be the very first.

And, of course, men who had been waiting for twenty and thirty years for a war to get into were just itching for it. That was the happy war. It was the chance to get fast promotions. It was the big time; it was the chance for heroics. It was the chance to get a big command, and above all it was a chance to see battle. And, oh, there were men, officers, who just reveled in it because it was their life’s career. I’ll tell you if there was anything that puzzled me all the time I was there—I would say, “What on earth am I doing here? Why was I ever put in this situation?” I felt I was just an observer. “Why, am I being shown this awful stuff? I don’t want to see it!” It was utter waste. But the wrongness of what we were doing was so strong that everybody would cry. People would cry; they would weep. They would . . . tears would stream down . . . the wrongness. It was so utterly, unspeakably sad. It wasn’t terrifying, but it was so sad you could hardly stand it that people would do such things to each other.

Yes, it’s a lonely beach [Utah Beach]. It was a good place to land, I suppose. Unexpected. But they knew all about it. The first ones that came out said, “But wait a minute—what happened? We thought you were going to come yesterday.” But they missed on the time, and they didn’t think we’d be insane enough to come in the weather. They never thought we would land in the various places we did, and of course neither did we. It was accidental. We were blown all over the place. Oh, the stories they told afterwards. The places they landed in. And the complete confusion everywhere, which confused the enemy as much as it confused us.

They said they’d never had a storm like that since the day World War I began. I remember the day World War I broke out. I was four years old. I remember it vividly: my father coming in reporting, and so forth. I remember the day it ended, exactly. Meantime we played in muddy lots. We played soldier, and when I found myself in the mud in France it was the very same thing. And again, when we’d make our operations, our drills, our CPXs [Command Post Exercises] on the British coast, here were these gun emplacements, but they had been Roman fortifications. They were gun emplacements made for the invasion of Napoleon, and here we were manning the same things for the same war. We hadn’t moved since the time of the Romans; the same thing. So I’m convinced that I’ve seen one war, two wars, and I’ll probably see three.

We haven’t learned a thing! And this is the thing that impressed me more than anything else—why I can’t get excited or sentimental about the whole operation of World War II—the word that kept popping into my head more than anything else was silly. It was utterly silly. It was needless; it was silly. They never had to give Hitler all that power. Fortunately, he was insane; if he hadn’t been he could have pushed us back into the sea with the greatest of ease. But the whole thing was silly, unnecessary, uncalled for, as the next war will be.

I had a full year of preparation for this operation, and it was all carefully planned. I knew perfectly well. . . . It was so intermeshed, so carefully coordinated, just as they say about “the elaborate plans for nuclear war: This will happen and this will happen. Then we’ll plan how we can control it.” But they couldn’t control anything—first place, the weather. They couldn’t move on the fifth; they had to move on the sixth. That threw everything out for us, but it saved our lives because the Germans were expecting us on the fifth. But nothing worked. Everything went foul here: people being landed on the wrong beach, the wrong things being landed at the wrong time, and so forth; all sorts of confusion; not getting the things you wanted. So, this idea that we can carefully plan it, that we have the intelligence to manage it, or the character to control events, is utterly absurd! “Man is nothing,” as the Book of Mormon says—“how great is the nothingness of man” (cf. Helaman 12:7), and Moses said, “I hadn’t supposed that before” (cf. Moses 1:10), but it is true. “I am nothing!” And when King Benjamin says, “We are less than the dust” (cf. Mosiah 2:25), he means get down there and realize what you are. But we don’t. We are very proud and arrogant. We still are—we have the power, we have the might. We can tell people what to do and they’ll do it. Especially certain people in Washington feel that very strongly, as you know.

The Way Out: Salvation and the Temple

Hugh Nibley: Why are we so benighted? Why is Israel so small? Why are those who accept the Lord’s solution so small? Not only because they want it that way, but, remember, Israel itself rejected the Lord. In every dispensation they do not seek him. They could find him instantly if they sought him. Remember, Abraham was the only one for ten generations—we’re told in the second chapter of the Book of Abraham—who sought the Lord, “Thy servant has sought thee earnestly, now I have found thee” (Abraham 2:12). So there’s good news and bad news, as there always has been. There’s always been bad . . . The good news is here—the gospel is here. The bad news—people aren’t going to accept it. It’s going to be rejected. And that’s it. They go on together. At the beginning of John it says, “But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become sons of God” (John 1:12). See that is the big issue. That is Israel. That is the peculiar people that is set apart, isolated, and so forth. He gave them power to become sons and Gods, to move into a totally different sphere, a totally different life. How many people are willing to do that, and how many people are ready? Remember, “the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not!” (John 1:5).

Madsen: Nibley has been a ritualist—that is, a man who not only sees that one way to study cultures is to look at their rites, but in addition is convinced that somehow these rites tie in to the ideas of the temple, and finally even to the foundations of civilization. Egypt seems to be the capital or the center related to many other cultures both temporally and spatially.

Hugh Nibley: The Egyptians realized, as we do, that all life comes from the sun. Its energy reaches us—its most immediate sensation is light. And if you are in Egypt you know how the sun dominates the picture. Light and life are literally inseparable. That’s a scientific fact of our own day. The light of the world is the life of the world, as the scriptures tell us (see D&C 88:7–13).

Here we are in the dark, mysterious passages beneath the Egyptian temples [temple of Denderah]. But they are still places of joy. We’ve got the joy symbols here. Just in coming down the final step here is the picture of the sun-disk sending down its rays from heaven, as it says, even to this dark place. Who wants to plunge into a dark underworld and leave this all behind? And only Egyptians, I say, were honest enough to recognize that that alone is the fundamental question.

One of the oldest written texts in the world is here [Tomb of Unas, Saqqara]. We do not start out with primitives uttering a lot of mumbo jumbo and dancing around and practicing cannibalism, and so forth. It is a very highly developed doctrine. There is another old text of it, and that is from the Shabako Stone. Well, here we are at the end of the journey, and we learn it is not the end. Just as they enter the door, we are told, he says, “The priests sing; he has come here to be purified; he has come here to be purified.” And then they break out into a hymn of praise and joy: ankhef ankhef, Unas pen ankh (>n∆=f, >n∆=f, Wn¶<s pn >n∆). “He lives, he lives. This Unas lives. He does not die.” En mutef, en mutef (n mt=f, n mt=f). “He does not die. Unas does not die. This Unas does not die.” En sekef (n sk=f). “He does not pass away.” After all he may be here, but he is going on and on.16 And finally we get to the end. From this it’s clear that he has completed all the ordinances. They say to him, pekherenek yatu (pẖr.n=k-ȝt.w): “Thou hast circumambulated the holy ceremonial centers.”17 I wrote a study on that; I know what I’m talking about there.18 Finally he says, “You are reinstated, complete.”

This displays the Egyptian love of multiple meanings. The various members of the body are those of Atum, the creator god, or they even are Atum. The Egyptians loved punning and I believe that em temet (m tm.t) can mean “completed, or a perfect thing.”19 In this case the legs are completely restored; it’s a perfect passive participle: your face, your head, then is the tongue down here complete. He is physically reinstated, everything is taken care of. He is now ready to leave, and he doesn’t stay long.

The positivism of modern science has obsessed us with this idea that the Egyptians are beset with this morbid preoccupation with death, the gloom, and the tomb [Cairo Museum]. The grisly mummy image, you know, that we got with the Egyptians. Nothing could be further from the truth. Resurrection, not death, is the theme here. Look at this man. He’s striding forth with purpose and gladness, his eyes looking forward. The hands above his head are raised in the ka-gesture, which is the salute to the spirit moving into the higher realm . . . the upper world is the ka. When you enter the presence of a great one you raise both hands to show that you are not armed. Also, that you bear no ill will and that you trust him completely. He is coming into the presence of the Father; you always call him the “Father,” with complete trust and confidence. That’s followed by the hepet (ḥpt), or the “embrace.”20 Then you embrace him and you become one with him. You become his son.

I have friends who say not only that they don’t believe on such absurdity, but that they don’t believe for a minute that I believe on it. They say you can’t believe on anything so silly, so far away. We’ve got so far away from that. But when you’re close to it, it becomes an obsession. What would you rather have? Would a man not give everything to have complete life—I mean abundant life—and live forever? What is the greatest of gifts? It’s eternal life. But, we say, there’s no such thing! Well, they say, there is, and of course, you’re obsessed with eternal life, if there is a chance for it. You’ll take . . . you’ll do everything. And I think that it’s important that we have these records that go back to these early times to get us off dead center.

What should we be looking for? Remember 1 Nephi ends with four things we should never look for. The first thing is gain, the second is power, the third is popularity, and the fourth is the lusts of the flesh, it says (1 Nephi 22:23). Those are the things, and they all go together. And those are the things everyone is looking for. Those are our objectives. Then you say, well, what should be our objectives? Ah, Abraham—the Book of Abraham—that second verse says what “I Abraham” was after, what he wanted. Now here’s what he’s after—“greater happiness and peace and rest for me” (cf. Abraham 1:2). So he seeks for “the blessings of the fathers, and the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same; having been myself a follower of righteousness” (Abraham 1:2). Now obviously he is in on a tradition. We’re dealing here with a sort of closed circle. Every time we mention these things, remember you have to be an initiate, you have to be inside. These things can’t be treated lightly. They have to be taken seriously. You see the great emphasis on Israel is that it’s a holy people, set apart. The word peculiar, s∂gullāh, “treasure, possession,” is a word they use, which strongly resembles the Latin sigillum “seal”—a sealed people: peculiar, treasured, set apart, reserved to me. The Lord uses those expressions all along. You’re supposed to be absorbing as many into yourself as you can so eventually you will suck in the whole world. And at each particular stage, the knowledge is limited to those who will receive it.

Wherever we look at these Egyptian monuments, the king has to follow one thing—maat: “righteousness, justice, fairness, honor, a stable social order, things as they should be.” We would say the two things that cover everything are that the Beloved Son is “full of grace and truth” (John 1:14). You see, truth has nothing false about it. But grace says there is nothing negative about it: self-interest, ulterior motives, scheming, gaining, trying to get ahead, influence, power game, none of that. Grace is the very opposite of that. It’s charis; our word cheer is also related to it, also the Greek charis, Latin gratia. Gratia means “thanks.” It means “a free gift,” a gift you don’t ask anything in return for. You feel that way, just as we give things to children not for what they can do for us, but because of love. The tendency is, of course, to render grace in the new translations as “love,” which is right. So grace and truth . . . and this is Abraham. Right from the beginning here when he says “having been a follower of righteousness,” this is righteousness; this is your maat— desiring also to be the one to possess greater knowledge. Always he wants to possess great knowledge, and then he wants a greater knowledge too.

Here’s where we draw the line; we don’t think that’s so important. We’ve lost interest in knowledge today, and it’s a very interesting thing. We want power, recognition, and things like that, but knowledge for its own sake doesn’t excite us very much. It’s surprising how many students will say, “Don’t tell us something we don’t already know.” I used to have students come up indignantly and say to me after class, “Brother Nibley, I’ve never heard of that before.” “Of course, that’s why you’re here, because you’ve never heard of that before!” But no, they just want to be told the same standard routine testimony and so forth. Desiring to be one to possess great knowledge and to be a greater follower of righteousness—notice, there is your gospel of repentance, to be a greater follower. You’re not doing well enough—never doing well enough. Like the man Adam, he is ever seeking more light and truth or more light and knowledge—either one.

Abraham not only had to take his wisdom to the Egyptians, but he had to acquire wisdom from them. This was the going concern. This was the center—not just the intellectual, but the spiritual center—of the world at the time. Abraham had to hack in, to use that expression now, on the whole world of his time because he is the father of the faithful, and it’s going to spread everywhere. He had to know the world, and the best place to get in on the ground floor was certainly Egypt. So he did, and we have to do the same sort of thing.

Thanks to the prolonged drought that was in the world, as testified from literature in all directions, the religious observances had degenerated into rites of a desperate and bloody nature to make the waters run, to bring prosperity, to bring fertility to the land, and so forth. It was a time of famine. Remember the whole story of Abraham, the background, the first of the labors of Abraham. The plague for Abraham was famine. Abraham made himself very unpopular. For that reason he would be an ideal substitute for the king for the sacrificial rites. The king was responsible for the prosperity and fertility of the land, as he was for the victory of the army. When those failed he was supposed to be put to death. Even when they didn’t fail, every thirty years at the sed-festival he had to be put to death,21 supposedly to renew his strength. But he found a substitute, and there’s a lot said about these substitutes. And we are told that Abraham went through this routine too, that he was rescued at the last minute by an earthquake. The moment he is rescued, the angel takes him up to heaven and then the angel shows him a picture. He draws the whole thing for him on this round picture and points it out to him and says, “When you get back to earth you make a duplicate of that.” Well, he shows him this diagram of the cosmos, and it looks like our facsimiles, and of course we see it as the hypocephalus, what it is. Then Pharaoh ordered all his court, 365 nobles, to bring their children to the court and had Abraham sit on the throne and teach them about the sun and the stars. That’s what it says here in Facsimile 3 [Book of Abraham]: “Abraham sitting upon Pharaoh’s throne . . . is reasoning upon the principles of astronomy [the heavens].” Now here’s an interesting thing—that figure on the throne is Osiris. Well of course he’s Osiris; he has to be.22 Abraham would have to be Osiris in that capacity, and he is the king. But how it begins, it begins with Facsimile 1. Osiris is lying on the couch. And he cries out, “Come to my aid and rescue me!” When he reaches the depth, at the last extremities, he cries out, and the angel of the Lord comes to deliver him. Now this is Horus, you’ll notice. He is the Horus-hawk, and always the son of Osiris is Horus. Horus comes in the form of a hawk and rescues him and takes him up. He delivers him, and then he takes him on a guided tour through the heavens. Before you receive your final throne you have this tour of the universe; you see all this stuff, and then in the final scene you mount the throne. This is what you do. You come out in glory. And so this is the theme and is exactly the course, the sequence that we follow in the Pearl of Great Price, Facsimiles 1, 2, and 3, in that order.

And so at the great temple at Denderah, you find, way up on the roof, the resurrection complex, and there what do you find but the themes of this Osiris myth: a sacrifice, a revelation of the cosmos, followed by coronation. It began with the drama of the passion or the sacrificial death of Osiris. But the hawk is bestirring him here. But here you notice instead of him on the lion couch, it is the disk arising, but it is not the solar-disk. It’s the kheperu (ḫprw), which means he is “changing” his form now, preserving his identity, but changing his form and rising up. That is the symbol of transformation and ascension, both. He’s got to rise. He has to make an astral journey here. These are astral figures. You’ll notice that there are stars strewn all through here, and here the king is striding through the heavens with the kabull, now with a star between his horns. That’s probably the constellation of Taurus, but notice here are the two heavenly ships as you’ll find on all the hypocephali because they represent passing through the heavens. You’ve got to have that part—these go right with the lion couch. Facsimile 2 should go with Facsimile 1. You can’t separate the cosmic functions from the resurrection and from the burial. So what do you do when you make the transition from here? You pass through the cosmos. So this is when he passes from the one to the other—he passes through the universe, and this is the record that’s left. These are the signs of the Zodiac as we recognize them. We recognize the Ram, the Bull, the Heavenly Twins. But see, in this context of being resurrected and passing through the heavens, they’re very cosmic conscious. They are conscious of the cosmos all the way through, and you’ll notice the two boats facing each other: the mandjetbark (mʿnḏ.t) and the mesket-bark (mskt.t), the morning-bark and the evening-bark, the cycle of time and the sun.

So here we have the hypocephalus motifs between what? Between Facsimile 1, Facsimile 2, and next Facsimile 3 is coronation. Now we emerge directly from the passage room— the passage through the kingdoms, the passage through the cosmos—to a coronation. We would say Facsimile number 3. This is the king on his throne, and all of these are typical coronation figures celebrating him, endowing him with the things he needs, and so forth. After passing through the cosmos, our hero, be it Abraham or someone else, now sits on the throne of Pharaoh and is endowed with his power. Notice he is holding—of course he has to hold—the insignia of justice and judgment, the flail and the crook, and he is being hailed as the living king.

Therefore, these are the mysteries of Osiris—see they are taught to him—and they include the greatest mystery of all: what comes after life. You see that is what they want to know. But the main idea is this making connections and hacking in or getting into the circuit, and so forth. These temple ordinances and things—they put you into an eternal, into a different order of things, which the world will not understand. And if you try to make them vulgarized down here and treat them as if they belong to this universe of discourse, then you spoil them. But you have this general sense now of working ourselves into a much larger universe of discourse. We have been very localized here, and Joseph Smith had a mind as broad as all eternity. He introduced us into all of this and then we immediately . . . our first reaction is to flinch and draw back. You say, well let’s go back to tithing and the Word of Wisdom, and that’s the story. It’s a mystery because it’s not known to the world we see around us. It is a mystery in that sense, but it shouldn’t be a mystery to you. You’re free to go as far as you want. It is entirely up to you. We’re all still qualifying as Osirises, as far as that goes.

We must do the works of Abraham. And then we are told specifically in the Doctrine and Covenants, that that means sacrificing, if necessary, your own life. Abraham was willing to do that, and everyone at some time or another will have the opportunity to show that he’d be willing to do that. Remember we’re told that Abraham was tested to the last extremes, to the ultimate extremity, as we are told in the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 101:4; 132:36, 50–51). Unless you are willing to give everything, you cannot claim eternal life. It’s not to be cheaply bought. These are the great blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and you must be willing to give even life itself, and so forth. There’s a story told in the Midrash. It begins with Abraham sitting in the door of his tent in the plain of Mamre in the heat of the day. But this was a hot day. It’s probably what inspired the story. It was a hot day—a day like the breath of Gehinnom— like the breath of hell was coming out, and you can see the kind of country it was, and is, when this is so, the heat and the dust and the sand . . . that’s utter desolation. And he was worried, of course, because he says some poor stranger might be lost out there. Someone might have lost his way and be perishing, because you’re not going to last an hour in this. So he sent his faithful servant Eleazer out to look everywhere. He sent him out in all directions, and he came back, “No, I can’t find anyone anywhere.” Abraham was still worried. He said, “There might be someone out there.” You have these feelings . . . so he went out himself, though he was very sick at the time. He was sick and ailing, and old, and he went out into that hell. And he looked and searched, but he found no one. And at the end of the day, he came back exhausted toward his tent. As he approached the tent the three strangers were standing there. It was the Lord and the two with him, because the Lord goes with his two counselors, so to speak. He threw himself down on his face, and then it is that the Lord promised him Isaac as a reward for what he had done: this supreme offering. It’s a very moving story.23 He’d gone out to look for his fellow man out in that dusty hell, all alone. Eliezer couldn’t find anyone, and Abraham said, “I think I can find someone.” Well, he found something. He found the answer to the thing he’d prayed for all his life: his son Isaac. It’s a beautiful story. But the desire of Abraham was that through him, his people and all mankind should be blessed. This Abraham who towers like a colossus is Everyman, as every man should be. In this world, remember what the Lord promised the apostles: “In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world” (John 16:33).

Notes

^1. Hugh Nibley said these words at a BYU commencement address, delivered 19 August 1983, which was published as “Leaders to Managers: The Fatal Shift,” Dialogue 16/4 (1983): 12–21; it was reprinted in Brother Brigham Challenges the Saints, CWHN 13 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1994), 491–508.

^2. Cf. Pearl of Great Price, Abraham, Fac. 1, figs. 1 and 4, lion-couch altar, with bird-angel above.

^3. This was once proposed as a title for this film.

^4. Mt. Hood is the highest mountain in Oregon (Cascade Range).

^5. Matthew 19:25 reads “exceedingly.” Mark and Luke simply say that the disciples then asked who could be saved.

^6. Hugh Nibley’s main articles dealing with economics, wealth, environment, and the gospel are as follows: “Our Glory or Our Condemnation,” “How Firm a Foundation! What Makes It So,” “Work We Must but the Lunch Is Free,” “But What Kind of Work?” “We Will Still Weep for Zion,” and “Breakthroughs I Would Like to See,” in Approaching Zion, CWHN 9 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1989), 1–24, 149–77, 202–51, 252–89, 341–77, 378–406; “Man’s Dominion, or Subduing the Earth,” “Brigham Young on the Environment,” in Brother Brigham Challenges the Saints, CWHN 13: 3–22, 23–54; and “The Philosophical Implications of Automation,” an unpublished lecture given in 1964.

^7. Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless is a collection of essays by Hugh Nibley published by the Brigham Young University Religious Studies Center in 1978 and in a second edition in 2004.

^8. Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau were associated with the Concord School of Philosophy.

^9. University of California at Berkeley, 1959–60.

^10. See his essay “The Genesis of the Written Word,” in Temple and Cosmos, CWHN 12 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1992), 450–90.

^11. Joseph Justus Scaliger was an Italian Scholastic of the sixteenth century; see Nibley, “New Light on Scaliger,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991), 303–10.

^12. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust, line 765.

^13. Mt. Wilson is above Pasadena, California. Hugh was living in Glendale, California, at the time.

^14. Raymond A. Moody, Life after Life: The Investigation of a Phenomenon— Survival of Bodily Death (St. Simons Island, GA: Mockingbird Books, 1975); and Reflections on Life after Life (New York: Bantam Books, 1977).

^15. “Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject.” Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 324.

^16. Pyramid Text 219 §167. Unas, the last pharaoh of the Fifth Dynasty, was the first to have his pyramid tomb inscribed with such texts.

^17. Cf. Pyramid Text 213 §§134–35.

^18. The Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri: An Egyptian Endowment, CWHN 16 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 2005), especially parts 6 and 7.

^19. Cf. Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, CWHN 16:465, Hebrew tāmîm.

^20. See ibid., 427–36.

^21. See ibid., 353.

^22. See ibid., 132–34.

^23. See Bernard Beer, Leben Abrahams nach Auffassung der jüdischen Sage (Leipzig: Leiner, 1859), 37–39, 153–59, nn. 367–409.

20

Not to Worry

This essay was published in Expressions of Faith: Testimonies of Latter-day Saint Scholars, ed. Susan Easton Black (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1996), 139–54.

I hesitate to applaud the idea of having schoolmen confront schoolmen to settle an issue. Terence and Galbungus debated for fourteen days and nights in a futile effort to decide whether the personal pronoun ego has a vocative case. That was a formal disputatio, a rhetorical exercise for showing off. As a disingenuous rustic at the Council of Nicaea observed just before the opening session, which was the more miraculous, to make a stone speak or a philosopher stop speaking? As usual, the Book of Mormon covers such contingencies: “There shall be no disputations among you, as there have hitherto been; neither shall there be disputations among you concerning the points of my doctrine. . . . He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil” (3 Nephi 11:28–29).

Debating was a popular sport on the American frontier. I refer to George Caleb Bingham’s famous painting Stump Speaking or to Joseph Smith’s own childhood recollection of the babble of voices in his neighborhood. Where religion is concerned, its effects have not been to settle issues but to exacerbate things to a state of permanent factions and sects.

Joseph recognized both the value and danger of debating lively issues; the last three months of 1835 brought the question to a head.

In his Ohio journal for 29 October 1835, the Prophet records: “Went to the Council. The Presidency arose and adjourned.” The meeting thus happily curtailed, “Elder Boynton observed that long debates were bad. I replied that it was generally the case that too much altercation was indulged in on both sides, and their debates protracted to an unprofitable length.”1 For how many years now have the same issues been brought out in periodic outbreaks of scholarship, with scholars picking over the same old chestnuts and calling them startling new discoveries?

One evening a month later (18 November 1835), Joseph, paying a convivial visit to his father’s house, found that “some of the young Elders were about engaging in a debate on the subject of miracles. . . . After an interesting debate of three hours or more, during which time much talent was displayed,” the judges pronounced their decision. But President Smith “discovered in this debate, much warmth displayed, too much zeal for mastery, too much of that enthusiasm that characterizes a lawyer at the bar, who is determined to defend his cause, right or wrong.” Joseph told the young men that “they might improve their minds and cultivate their powers of intellect in a proper manner, that they might not incur the displeasure of heaven; that they should handle sacred things very sacredly, and with due deference to the opinions of others, and with an eye single to the glory of God.”2

Almost exactly a month later, on 16 December 1835, the Prophet says he went to Brother William Smith’s to take part in the debate that was commenced Saturday evening last. After the debate was concluded, . . . some altercation took place upon the propriety of continuing the school [debate] fearing that it would not result in good. Brother William Smith opposed these measures, and insisted on having another question proposed, and at length became much enraged, particularly at me, and used violence upon my person, and also upon Elder Jared Carter, and some others.3

Two days after the brawl, in a long letter to William, Joseph concluded that the debaters were “under the influence of a wicked spirit”4—that is, the spirit of contention, and “he that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention” (3 Nephi 11:29).

Going through the journals on both sides, it all seems like déjà vu, back to the Patrologia and schools of the Sophists, where the arguments were already trite. What kept the doctors going for thousands of years? The inexhaustible fires of vanity. “Where is the man that is free from vanity?” said Joseph Smith.5

There are some very good articles in Sunstone, Dialogue, and other publications, including the Church magazines. But the general feeling in perusing many of those publications is that of walking on a treadmill: The scenery never changes. There are always legitimate boasts and grievances. I will admit that floods are bad, fires deplorable, plagues are awful, and the faults of one’s leaders can be annoying. But what do you expect me to do about it? While I wait for the millennium, I have full instructions: to do what the Saints should be doing under all conditions, good or bad. The commandments do not alter with circumstances or they would be hopelessly pliable. No matter what happens, I know exactly what to do: “If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him” (James 1:5, emphasis added). This was the first revelation given to the boy Joseph.

What is happening today is nothing new. Joseph had no sooner prepared a banquet for the Saints than the cooks began crowding into the kitchen, each eager to improve the recipe. It has always been thus; it may even be salutary, this periodic shaking up, like the forest fires of Yellowstone.

Here is Brother Joseph home from Missouri, safe in the bosom of the Saints at last: “After a tedious journey from the midst of enemies, mobs, cholera, and excessively hot weather,”

I found all well on my ar[r]ival, . . . but found our common adv[er]sary had taken the advantage of our brothe[r] Sylvest[er] Smith and others who gave a false colloring to allmost every transaction from the time that we left Kirtland untill we returned, and thereby stirred up a great difficulty in the Church against me accordingly I was met in the face and eyes as soon as I had got home with a catalogue that was as black as the author [Satan] himself and the cry was Tyrant! Pope!! King!!! Usurper!!!! Abuser of men!!!!! Ange[l]!!!!!! False prophet!!!!! Prophesying Lies in the name of the Lord and taking consecrated monies!!!!!!! and every other lie to fill up and complete the cattelogue that was necissary to perfect the Church to be meet for the devourer the shaft of the distroying Angel! . . . But that God . . . has given me power from the time that I was born (into this kingdom) to stand and I have succeeded in putting all gainsayers and enemies to flight unto the present time.6

He concludes the missive by remarking that “the church seems to be in a languid cold disconsolate state, and . . . we may look for revolutions among this wicked and perverse generation and also in the Church of Christ!”7

Two years later what is the situation?

The powers of Earth & hell seem combined to overthrow us and the church by causing a division in the family, and indeed the adversary is bring[ing] into requisition all his subtlety to prevent the Saints from being endowed, by causing division among the 12, also among the 70, and bickerings and jealousies among the Elders and official members of the church, and so the leaven of iniquity foments and spreads among the members of the church.8

Such was his New Year’s greeting for 1 January 1836.

As Andrew Ehat and Lyndon Cook have pointed out, “Often throughout the remainder of his life [that is, after 1840], Joseph Smith would lament that many Saints were unwilling to accept the glorious things revealed to him from heaven.”9 In his own words, “I have tried for a number of years to get the minds of the Saints prepared to receive the things of God; but . . . [they] will fly to pieces like glass as soon as anything comes that is contrary to their traditions.”10 This, we are told, was a severe trial to him. Brigham Young would get so exasperated when the Saints failed to act on clear and sensible advice that he “could have wept like a whipt child” in sheer frustration.11 For all his frustration, the Prophet Joseph gave no magisterial commands: “Did I not give [any man] the liberty of disbelieving any doctrine I have preached, if he saw fit?”12 Nay, he said, “Every man has a natural, and, in our country, a constitutional right to be a false prophet, as well as a true prophet.”13 Advice and admonition were freely available, but without compulsion. Speaking to a throng of newly arrived immigrants in Nauvoo, Joseph “showed them that it was generally in consequence of the brethren disregarding or disobeying counsel that they became dissatisfied and murmured.” But then Joseph’s irrepressible charity and good nature shows through: “But if they would bear with my infirmities and the infirmities of the brethren, I would likewise bear with their infirmities.”14 Concluding an exuberant welcome and wise counsel to newly arrived immigrants to Nauvoo, he observed almost casually that he would have to leave them and hide out in the woods for a while. Such is not the stuff of power-mad, image-conscious dictators.

The Prophet was always aware of what was going on. “We have thieves among us, adulterers, liars, hypocrites. . . . As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the devil and lose knowledge. . . . The Church must be cleansed.”15

There is a great deal of murmuring in the Church about me; but I don’t care anything about it. . . .

. . . Well, be it so. If the stories about Joe Smith are true, then the stories of John C. Bennett are true about the ladies of Nauvoo; . . . that the Ladies’ Relief Society are all organized of those who are to be the wives of Joe Smith. Ladies, you know whether this is true or not.16

Passages like this are still used today to support Bennett as an authentic source of Church history.

Recently, a new line of books has made available significant details of Joseph Smith’s personal history. Now beside the Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, your library should contain Ehat and Cook’s The Words of Joseph Smith; Dean C. Jessee’s The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith and The Papers of Joseph Smith; Joseph Smith: The Prophet, the Man, edited by Susan Easton Black and Charles D. Tate Jr.; and An American Prophet’s Record: The Diaries and Journals of Joseph Smith, compiled by Scott H. Faulring.17 From such works we see how the Twelve kept a revolving door in motion as they left Joseph to tell vile stories to the papers and swear horrendous affidavits in court, only to return in a few weeks or months to ask for forgiveness and reinstatement, which were instantly granted, until presently for some new grievance they effected another departure and subsequent repentance. It seems that the revolving door has always been available and many Saints have had a way of blowing hot and cold, usually depending on business and politics.

When I was young I used to go to the bookstores that lined the dingy streets of lower Los Angeles. The stores had alcoves or whole walls lined with books labeled “Mormon.” Anti-Mormon literature was a special genre in those days. To qualify as an author, one only had to have been a Mormon, the one unchallenged certificate of authenticity. False memory flourished as one writer supported another in a flood of clichés and purple prose. No one paid any attention to Joseph’s own story, and this is a remarkable thing. From his day to the present, the Prophet’s image has never changed; after all the study and research, there has been no revision because any concession at all would require a new reading of the whole story. Who would believe that a book entitled Secret Ceremonies: A Mormon Woman’s Intimate Diary on Marriage and Beyond was not the product of hysterics of the proper 1880s or lurid early 1900s, but was published and sold in the year 1993?

Shining Armor

A common refrain of our learned Mormon critics is, “Why should anyone want to fight the truth?” Open-minded, detached, and informed, they only want to help, and their sensibilities are injured when the generous offer is not accepted. “Truth is what I believe—if it wasn’t true, of course I wouldn’t believe it.” In the past, thousands have left the Church as individuals or in groups and gone their ways, which is the sensible thing to do if you no longer believe its message. But many have found out that when they are Mormon has-beens, the public loses all interest in them; those splinter groups that have so often broken from the Church inevitably fade and vanish or persist as forlorn little communities.

Joseph built the house—a colossal task—but others have always offered to make their own alterations. Are they qualified? It depends on how much they really know, since superior knowledge is what they would bring to the project. This takes us to the subject of scholarship. Socrates always told his disciples to test the knowledge of their Sophist teachers before following them. But that is a no-no in the profession; it is insidious and embarrassing, and it cost Socrates his life. The purpose of caps, gowns, processions, degrees, committees, offices, ranks, and so on is to deflect, discourage, and overawe any who would ask naive questions about the emperor’s clothes. But we must ask just the same. What do these people have that the Saints have not had in the past? We are referred in our scholarly journals to the priceless ingredient— “scholarly methodologies.” Since the mid-nineteenth century, the universal credo has been that to be valid at all, scholarship had to be scientific. It had to have its special methods. It was refined and sharpened methodology that converted mere guessing to science; in religion, specifically in biblical scholarship, it became Higher Criticism.

The scholastic philosophers laid down rules for God— what he could do and what he could not do, what he was and what he was not. In making their translations and commentaries of the scriptures, they added and subtracted to suit their fancy, thus doing what they strictly forbade God to do. From the early Renaissance, scholarship became a matter of restoring the wisdom of the ancients from a vast heap of newly discovered manuscripts. It was a matter of collecting, sorting, then reading, comparing, and classifying manuscripts, and afterwards forming one’s own conclusions. The idea of modern “scholarly methodologies” imparting unlimited authority is high comedy; it fairly pleads for Gilbert and Sullivan: After the chorus has sung its welcoming praise, the Great Scholar steps forward to center stage and sings his aria, how in school and seminar he learned to intone in the correct voice, or drawl, wear the tweed or the cloth with equal deference, smoke the pipe, and follow the departmental line.

The actual method of these giants was surprisingly simple. A great scholar goes through the scriptures and every time he finds a passage proclaiming the miraculous, supernatural, or otherworldly, he simply expunges the offending words as obvious interpolations or corruptions in the text. In the 1940s, Rudolf Bultmann and others called it “demythologizing.” What remained after this learned exercise of casting out lingering remnants of dark superstition from the Bible was the pure original text, stripped of all supernatural accumulations.

In the 1920s and 1930s, a crowd of LDS graduate students went to the University of Chicago for a ministerial Ph.D. and returned to BYU as ardent disciples of Albert Schweitzer, Ernest Renan, Adolf von Harnack, and the rest. They demythologized Jesus on the authority of the immortal Goodspeed.18 Despite the heated debates of the 1940s and 1950s, BYU weathered the Higher Criticism of Chicago rather well.

While teaching at Claremont in the 1930s, I shared a humanities class with Goodspeed, who had retired from Chicago. He insisted with great emphasis that the New Testament was a Greek document because not a single Hebrew manuscript was known to exist from Jesus’ time. It was shortly after Dr. Goodspeed’s death that the Dead Sea Scrolls were discovered—how could he have known? Here were ordinary Jews writing Hebrew with skill and confidence in the time of Christ. Which illustrates the first rule of scholarship: You are never playing with a full deck. You never know how much evidence you may be missing, what it is, or where it is hiding. What counters that and saves the day for scholarship is what I have called the “Gas Law of Learning”—namely, that any amount of knowledge, no matter how small, will fill any vacuum of ignorance, no matter how large. He who knows one or two facts can honestly claim to know at least something about a subject, and nobody knows everything. So it is with the schoolmen who make the rules and move the goalposts.

Joseph Smith did not come before the world with a premise, or a proposition, or a hypothesis, or a special interpretation of the scriptures, any of which would have given logical grounds for endless discussion. He simply told a straight story to be accepted or rejected, leaving no room for argument. He could neither deny his story nor reach an accommodation with the ministers, and that explains a good deal of their implacable rage against him. “What is a Bible scholar anyway?” asks Harold Bloom. “A Bible scholar, so far as I can see, with very rare exceptions, is just a very bad literary critic.”19 The scholar is really doing what the literary critic does, giving his considered opinion, which is passed off as scientific fact on the helpless public awed by the mysteries of “scholarly methodology.” Bloom continues (we may credit Sunstone for printing this), “[Joseph] Smith had found his way back, either by inspiration or by imagination, . . . to certain elements in archaic Judaism [see the books of Moses, Enoch, Abraham, Nephi, and so on] that normative Judaism and Christianity have abandoned.”20 That may, if you please, be fanciful stuff, but it is specific and amenable to careful checking against ancient sources, although few were available to anyone in Joseph’s time and none were available to him. Others—scientists like Eric Paul, scholars like Eduard Meyer, and learned mystics like Manley P. Hall— have noted the same phenomenon in the case of Joseph: He had an inside track to something. But no one has followed up on it, and why should they? The Mormons have a vested interest in such a pursuit but find it too much trouble. When mere appointment to the office of group leader can give one authority or stature, why should anyone bother? To find the things that Joseph found, however, no one can “come unto Mount Zion . . . unless he becomes as a little child, and is taught by the Spirit of God. Wherefore, we again say, search the revelations of God: study the prophecies.”21 So said Joseph Smith, who declared that he was fearful to ask God, in behalf of others, “about things the knowledge of which men ought to obtain in all sincerity, before God, for themselves.” And how for themselves? “In humility by the prayer of faith.”22

Star Witness

The greatest scholarly work of modern times is undoubtedly that of Eduard Meyer. To this day, his Geschichte des Altertums (History of Antiquity) is considered to be “the most perfectly documented and soundly reasoned resume of what is actually known about the peoples of antiquity.”23 “The project was not original, but never before had it been undertaken by anyone with a comparable preparation.”24 Nor will it ever be surpassed again for, as Erik Hornung recently observed, “Egyptian historiography reached its high-water mark in Eduard Meyer.”25 No one else could master the vast weight and scope of the materials, which are now doubled and broken into a dozen specialties. Meyer had a special preference for the history of religions, which never left him from his dissertation (at the age of twenty) to the great work of his old age, Ursprung und Anfänge des Christentums (The Origin and Beginnings of Christianity). He matched that with another work, Geschichte der Mormonen, mit Excursen über die Anfänge des Islams und des Christentums (The Origin and Beginnings of the Mormons, with Reflections on the Beginnings of Islam and Christianity), published in 1912. What a happy coincidence! The origins of religion were always his grand passion, and for him Joseph Smith held the key. “Mormonism excited interest at an early age,” Meyer writes, “both because of its surprising analogy to Islam” and also because “Mormonism is one of the most instructive phenomena in the whole area of religious history. . . . Students of religions have kept themselves strictly aloof from Mormonism and disdained the rich instruction it has to offer.”26

It is not just another of countless sects, but a new revealed religion, [with] an exceptionally rich contemporary store of documents; . . . what in the study of other revealed religions can only be surmised after painful research is here directly accessible in reliable witnesses. Hence the origin and history of Mormonism possesses a great and unusual value to the students of Religious History.27

The common claim that Joseph Smith borrowed from the sects around him will not hold up, according to Meyer; for what it has in common with them anybody can find in the Bible.28 In Joseph’s revelations there is no sign of conscious deception or of outside influence.29

To say that he was simply a swindler no more explains Joseph Smith than it explains Amos, or Isaiah, or Mohammed, or Jeanne d’Arc. Many deserted Joseph Smith but never denied his prophetic calling. He expelled many from the Church; he never solicited the support of anyone or made any concessions in his message. It is the case of Joseph Smith that sheds light on all the others (Amos, Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, or Zoroaster and Hesiod) and not the other way around.30

But how about the Book of Mormon? The angel and the plates were for the Three Witnesses an “absolutely real experience.”31 But how to explain the Eight Witnesses? Meyer gives up on it. As a Higher Critic he cannot allow any taint of supernaturalism. Mormonism is not the correct view of Christianity because it does not accept the Christ of the Higher Critics:

Jesus never appeared as a prophet. Certainly he feels the closest communication with God, who is his loving Father; the doctrine which Jesus preaches is God’s truth, and hence Christ claims the authority to interpret the law autonomously and to teach religious truth and God’s commandments with sovereign authority. But never did he claim a direct revelation which came to him in a moment, much less that he would have materialized such a revelation. Christ did not have visions, and he never predicted future events; he did not take any stand concerning the events of this world, nor did he give instructions concerning the world. His way was completely different from that of the prophets, including John the Baptist, Zoroaster, Mohammed, or Joseph Smith; Christ is not a prophet, but a teacher like Buddha, who makes known religious truth in authoritative sayings and parables made convincing by their inner evidence.32

But how about John? “It goes without saying that the Gospel of John is utterly worthless as a source for the historical knowledge of Jesus.”33 So that need not annoy us. “Jesus never did predict future events.” And Matthew 24? An obvious interpolation and invention, since such things just do not happen. The stories of transfiguration and ascension are mere fiction.34 And so the Higher Critic has it all his own way. But, true or false, Mormonism parallels primitive Christianity: “During our historic presentation [of Mormonism] the thoughts of the reader . . . must often have strayed to the beginning of Christianity.”35

As to the visions, angels, healings, casting out of devils, and other supernatural events, Jesus himself shared these beliefs; for him too, the constant intervention of the other world was something to be taken for granted. But the Book of Mormon? Forget it: “The style is clumsy and monotonous in the highest degree. . . . No one but a believer will ever bring himself to read it clear through.”36 From which it is evident that Meyer himself never gave it any intensive study. He dismisses it with the license of the Higher Critic.

“There is no doubt at all that the golden plates, even though his mother and others say they were kept in a box in Smith’s house, never existed in the real world.”37 “There is no doubt at all,” claims the same absolute authority for rejecting the testimony of John, which, “it goes without saying,” is worthless.

After displaying his prejudices, Meyer, backed by the full force of his matchless learning and insight, issues a confident prophecy for the Mormon Church as of 1912: “Though it has not been destroyed . . . still it has sunk from the position of a coming world religion to a sect something of the type of Judaism or the Parses”38—that is, a small, respectable, obscure, fading community. There is no more remarkable prophecy of Joseph Smith than his own unequivocal view of the future of the Church with its unstoppable progress. This is the thing that most impressed Eduard Meyer: All great religious founders have their moments of self-doubt, soul-searching, and agonizing—with the one single exception of Joseph Smith, who never for a moment betrayed the slightest sign of doubt or hesitation as to his calling or the future of Zion.

Meyer gives the clearest demonstrations of how critical methodology works. The resurrection story of the early Christians was an obvious fiction since it so perfectly matched the very story the early Christians wanted to believe.39 They liked the story so much they must have made it up. The appearances of God to men in Genesis are exactly like those described by Paul and the early Christians, along with Moses and Joseph Smith—and what could be plainer proof, not that they are authentic, but that they are simply being copied and borrowed from the original in Genesis?40 The many appearances of Christ after his resurrection are a cover-up, a conscious fabrication. Once assumed, this is “a neat [hübsch] illustration of how rationalistic criticism has always operated; the fact that the body has disappeared from the tomb is not questioned, but a logical explanation is sought.”41 Credo quia absurdum . . . credible est quia impossible, says Tertullian—if it is absurd, nobody has made it up; if it makes sense, somebody has been adjusting it.

The Big Question

The one purpose of religion is to answer the Terrible Question, which is also the one thing the clergy will not touch. Hans Kuehn’s Theology for the Third Millennium contains not a single mention of death or the hereafter! The social gospel is the clergy’s refuge from the question. As Ernest Becker put it, “When philosophy took over from religion it also took over religion’s central problem, and death became the real ‘muse of philosophy’ from its beginning in Greece right through Heidegger and modern existentialism.”42 It was not until the late 1930s that the smart-aleck 1920s and early 1930s came face-to-face with a shocking realization brought home by depression and war that “to see the world as it really is is devastating and terrifying. . . . It places a trembling animal at the mercy of the entire cosmos and the problem of the meaning of it.”43 Søren Kierkegaard, a contemporary of Joseph Smith, became the flag bearer of the modern sophisticates. His “whole understanding of man’s character is that it is a structure built up to avoid perception of the ‘terror, perdition [and] annihilation [that] dwell next door to every man.’”44

On the very day that Joseph Smith renamed Commerce Town to make it a thing of beauty, Kierkegaard in his journal (12 May 1839) cries out in hopeless despair: “‘The whole order of things fills me with a sense of anguish . . . all is entirely unintelligible to me, and particularly my own person. Great is my sorrow, without limits. None knows of it, except God in heaven, and He cannot have pity!’”45 Becker writes, “This is the terror: to have emerged from nothing, to have a name, consciousness of self, deep inner feelings, an excruciating inner yearning for life, and self-expression—and with all this yet to die. It seems like a hoax.”46 So we try not to think of it, and, instead, like Kierkegaard’s Philistine, we tranquilize ourselves “in the trivial.”47 According to Neo-Freudianism, “consciousness of death is the primary repression, not sexuality. . . . This is the repression on which culture is built.”48 Freud, says his biographer, “had constantly before him the vision of man who is always unhappy, helpless, anxious, bitter, looking into nothingness with fright, and turning away from ‘so-called posterity’ in anticipatory . . . disgust.”49 This is the great revelation of the modern age.

But Joseph Smith had already stated the problem as clearly as anyone ever has and done what no one else has done in giving us the solution. “What is the object of our coming into existence, then dying and falling away, to be here no more? . . . [This] is a subject we ought to study more than any other. We ought to study it day and night. . . . If we have any claim on our Heavenly Father for anything, it is for knowledge on this important subject.”50 And this is where religion has failed, turning to the social gospel and intellectual posturing to avoid the issue.

Joseph Smith not only states the problem, but he provides the prime clue to the answer on the same page: “Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject.”51 The answer must come from the outside, and that is recognized now. The term breakthrough that Eduard Meyer applied to the beginning of Christianity and Mormonism is today being widely used in theological journals to explain the divine origin of Christianity: It cannot be a human invention, our own imagining; to be real it must come from elsewhere. But of course the phenomenon is denied for modern times.

I ask LDS students what they would do with a thousand years of life, guaranteed, all expenses paid, and they give silly answers because they have been conditioned by the actuary to accept short lives with the prospect that all they will ever get is right here. They do not see the breakthrough. The great breakthroughs of 1820 and 1827, which changed everything, should settle the issue—but is it all real? Joseph shows us that it is: When solid plates pass between inhabitants of different worlds and visitors from above lay hands upon the heads of Joseph and his brethren, something is afoot. If it stopped there, we would be bemused, but Joseph kept his promise to tell us what was on the plates, to give us glimpses of things that lie beyond human reckoning.

Do you have the remotest inkling of an idea, my dear Galbungus, how much sheer mental effort it would take the smartest person to produce a book of Enoch, or Abraham, or Nephi, or Ether, or Helaman, or the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants? To lay it all out in order with the vast sweep and scope of the Book of Moses, bridging great gaps in the human record? The Pearl of Great Price putting the whole into a cosmic setting in the manner of the ancients? The Book of Mormon with its ever-changing scenes of desert wanderers, luxury and danger in Jerusalem, migrations, wars, politics, ecology, trade and commerce, law and lawyers, paramilitary terrorists, youth gangs, strategy and tactics, natural disasters, organized crime, corrupt courts and politicians, dangerous opportunists, secret organizations, vain intellectuals, devout sectaries in the wilderness, prophets as near-death witnesses of the afterlife, great missionaries, dynastic feuds, and more, and with all this the doctrines of salvation set forth more fully than anywhere else, and in a setting not of Joseph Smith’s rural America but of our own climactic age? It is no wonder Smith’s most ambitious critics from Meyer to Fawn Brodie steer us away from the Book of Mormon and Pearl of Great Price, which leave them high and dry as critics.

So I see no reason why people should set themselves up as lights; I need not focus my feeble beam on the faults of others, in the Church or out, simply as a means of calling attention to myself. What remains is only “bearing down in pure testimony” (Alma 4:19).

Notes

^1. History of the Church, 2:294.

^2. Ibid., 2:317–18.

^3. Ibid., 2:334–35 (brackets in original).

^4. Ibid., 2:341.

^5. Ibid., 4:358.

^6. The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, comp. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), 328–29.

^7. Ibid., 331.

^8. Ibid., 121.

^9. The Words of Joseph Smith, ed. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Provo, UT: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1980), 55.

^10. History of the Church, 6:185.

^11. Journal of Discourses, 2:280.

^12. History of the Church 6:273.

^13. Ibid., 6:304.

^14. Ibid., 5:181.

^15. Ibid., 4:588.

^16. Ibid., 5:285–86.

^17. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976); The Words of Joseph Smith, ed. Ehat and Cook; The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, comp. Dean C. Jessee; The Papers of Joseph Smith, comp. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989, 1992); Joseph Smith: The Prophet, the Man, ed. Susan Easton Black and Charles D. Tate Jr. (Provo, UT: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1993); and An American Prophet’s Record: The Diaries and Journals of Joseph Smith, comp. Scott H. Faulring (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1989).

^18. Edgar Johnson Goodspeed, the prominent University of Chicago theologian.

^19. Brett DelPorto, “Harold Bloom’s Ironic, Female, Co-Author of the Bible,” Sunstone, April 1991, 57.

^20. Ibid., 56.

^21. History of the Church, 1:283.

^22. Ibid., 1:339; see James 1:5.

^23. Enciclopedia Universal Illustrada, ed. S. A. Espasa-Calpe (Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, 1907–30), 34:1377.

^24. Enciclopedia Italiana di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti (Rome: Instituto Della Enciclopedia Italiana, 1934), 23:140.

^25. Erik Hornung, Einführung in die Ägyptologie (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1967), 121.

^26. Eduard Meyer, The Origin and History of the Mormons, trans. Heinz F. Rahde and Eugene Seaich (Salt Lake City: University of Utah, 1961), i.

^27. Ibid.

^28. Ibid., 22–23.

^29. Ibid., 10.

^30. Ibid., vii–ix.

^31. Ibid., 9.

^32. Ibid., 199.

^33. Ibid.

^34. Ibid., 200–201.

^35. Ibid., 198.

^36. Ibid., 22–23, 25.

^37. Ibid., 5.

^38. This is likely Nibley’s translation of Meyer’s original German in Ursprung und Geschichte der Mormonen (Halle: Niemeyer, 1912), i; cf. Meyer, Origin and History of the Mormons, i.

^39. Meyer, Origin and History of the Mormons, 202.

^40. Ibid., 213–14.

^41. Ibid., 207.

^42. Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death (New York: Free Press, 1973), 12.

^43. Ibid., 60.

^44. Ibid., 70 (brackets in original), quoting Søren Kierkegaard.

^45. Ibid., 67, quoting Kierkegaard.

^46. Ibid., 87.

^47. Ibid., 74, quoting Kirekegaard.

^48. Ibid., 96.

^49. Ibid., 122, quoting Gregory Zilboorg, Psychoanalysis and Religion (London: Allen and Unwin, 1967), 242.

^50. History of the Church, 6:50 (emphasis added).

^51. Ibid.

21

The Last Days, Then and Now

This essay was originally published in The Disciple as Scholar: Essays on Scripture and the Ancient World in Honor of Richard Lloyd Anderson, ed. Stephen D. Ricks, Donald W. Parry, and Andrew H. Hedges (Provo, UT: FARMS, 2000), 269–303.

Dear Brother Anderson,

This is going to be discourse without footnotes. I have always had a suppressed desire to risk such an indiscretion, and people have asked why I cannot write anything without timidly quoting chapter and verse from some German professor. This time, ignoring the public and the pedants, I pass the piece to a magnanimous and sensible critic, awaiting his weary sighs or indulgent silence with equanimity. Where we quote it will be from memory, wens and all, speaking with conviction but with no authority whatever.

What Is an Achsenzeit?

It is about “axial” times and dispensations. They are those moments when civilization turns on its axis to face a totally new direction, sometimes referred to as a quantum leap; only at the same time that the old order collapses like a big bubble in a mud geyser, the old order is immediately followed by a new bubble just like it. Thus instead of displaying an ever-onward evolution, the course of history is punctuated at intervals by sudden reversions to square one after the breakdown of the old order had promised a bright new day. The axial extravaganza is thus “the best of times and the worst of times.” Any idealistic little Zions are soon removed from the scene, and the world is back on its old track. The seeds of the great revolution now become the seeds of the next revolution.

It is remarkable that the phenomenon remained unremarked for so long. Your bemused informant noticed it in writing the 1957 Melchizedek Priesthood manual. It seemed that Joseph Smith had chosen the perfect moment for Lehi’s crossing of the seas and founding of a new civilization. That is just the sort of thing that was happening everywhere about the year 600 B.C. It was a great age of discovery, exploration, and colonization—Hanno sailed around Africa in 600 B.C., and Olbia and Massilia at opposite ends of the Mediterranean world were founded by Greeks who themselves had to make room for swarming hordes pushing in from Asia, an event celebrated by the great lyric poets. Above all came the great intellectual revolution: Thales, the founder of modern physics; Pythagoras, his rival in the West; and Heraclitus, who put it all together, were all contemporaries of Lehi, as were the founders of the great world religions—Buddha, Confucius, Mahavira, and Zarathustra. I like to think that Lehi, an eminent merchant, had dealings with Solon, wisest of the Greeks and founder of Athenian democracy, who, when his family fortunes were ruined by the disastrous honesty and generosity of his father, had to cover his losses by business trips to Sidon.

Today there is a great and sudden revival of axial studies, and all scholars are agreed that the immense significance of 600 B.C. is the switch of Western thought from the “magic-mythic” thinking of the ancients to the rational and scientific mind of today. The Egyptologist Jan Assmann has written that the man of 600 B.C. “is the man we live with today.”

After writing the manual, I remembered that H. G. Wells had taken note of the phenomenon in his Outline of History, which I had read on my mission in 1928 (on a Saturday, of course; reading was not considered a vice in those days). Shortly after came the belated discovery that the German philosopher Karl Jaspers had described the great event and given it the name of the Achsenzeit, the Axial Period, as early as 1948. The recent revival of interest, one suspects, may be prompted by the disturbing possibility of another such event in the alarmingly near future. It has sent the experts searching widely and delving deeply for all sorts of axial periods—600 B.C. was not the only axial period. For example, Professor Assmann insists that the First Dynasty of Egypt was the Big One, being as far back as human memory goes and so was the beginning of everything.

The list of candidates for axial honors is an impressive one. The fall of the great world capitals—Troy, Babylon, Nineveh, Rome, Constantinople, etc.—each represents a turning point in world history. The civilizations of China and India are also carefully noted but though their technical and intellectual advances were significant, we are told (still barring footnotes) that they never rid themselves sufficiently of the magic-mythic-mystic elements. World migrations, ending the Roman Empire and creating the nations and languages of Europe, now recall other and earlier “dark centuries,” convincingly coordinated with the Big (1200–800 B.C.) and Little (a.d. 1440–1750) Ice Ages. Long before that, the sophisticated animal art of the caves of the Ariège and vicinity between 30,000 and 20,000 B.C. is the great “Quantum Leap” that marks the emergence of true human beings. After the rise and collapse of Egyptian and Mesopotamian splendor came the all-too-brief Periclean and Augustan Ages, the Gothic glory and the Italian Renaissance, the great seventeenth century followed by the self-important Age of Reason and Oswald Spengler’s Untergang des Abendlandes (The Decline of the West).

The Axial Steady State

Why was the axial event overlooked for so long? Answer: among the courses I took in high school was the “Progress of Civilization”; later I took one at UCLA called the “Idea of Progress.” The bursting meliorism of twentieth-century evolutionism, with Chicago taking the lead, swept all before it. Natural selection guaranteed inevitable progress from the single cell to the godlike scientist. At the same time at Los Angeles High, we read Omar Khayyám and recited his frank and realistic appraisal of the situation: “One moment in annihilation’s waste, one moment of the well of life to taste—the stars are setting and the caravan starts for the dawn of nothing—O, make haste!” It was the existential agony of Kierkegaard, which was to become the fare of the next generation. The mindless, random, mechanical, and infallible operations of natural selection guaranteed that things could only go on getting better and better, but also that we were going nowhere.

Heraclitus, the favorite philosopher of many brooders, divided his mental problems into the realms of the cosmos, the king or government, and religion, all subject to axial changes. Many recent studies of the oldest creation myths show that the creation story always seems to follow upon the destruction of something greater and more wonderful. The new worlds are made of the ruins of the old. The progression in Hesiod and Daniel is from a Golden Age, now long gone, through those of silver, copper, iron, and now clay.

The axial occurrences seem actually to reverse the course of evolution; in the end things never seem to progress, and “there is nothing new under the sun.” Since “man’s great disobedience and the fall,” the race appears to be in a perpetual free fall. As Edward Gibbon puts it, the Roman Empire was born decadent. The most significant difference between this philosophy of Heraclitus, “the wet blanket” (skoteinos), and that of what Albright called the “Chicago School” is that the Greek conclusion rests on solid evidence, the other on pure, American twentieth-century boomerism.

The actual story of the race is divided into separate, distinct, and discrete episodes. It cannot be viewed or digested in any other way. It is not progressive—and that is the most shocking thing about it. Take Lehi’s story. It begins in the supremely optimistic year of 600 B.C., which presently explodes in the fall of Jerusalem and the Captivity. But along with the bright promise that introduces Nephite civilization goes the plotting of Laman and Lemuel, already setting Lehi’s children on the road to Cumorah. Next, the glory of Zarahemla and its apocalyptic obliteration were followed at once by the nearest thing to a Zion civilization; but then the old appeal of money, power, and pride building up to a perpetual crime wave necessitated defensive tribal organizations, which ended with the last tribal coalitions, at Cumorah, and henceforward a permanent, shifting, savage warfare.

As that same force of gravity which brings the stars into existence also brings about their violent demise, even so, the natural man is programmed to bring about the corruption and fall of civilization by his constant and unvarying selfcenteredness. According to Solon and Heraclitus it must be so if “the natural man is an enemy to God . . . carnal, sensual, [and] devilish” (Mosiah 3:19; 16:3), a flawed product of evolution, as Arthur Koestler wrote just before his suicide, programmed to self-destruct. It is only since the sixties that “Neocatastrophism” pointed to at least five major extermination periods on earth, when almost all existing species (sometimes 90 percent or more) were wiped out and abruptly displaced by a whole new menagerie of dominant types. The face of the earth itself, like that of all the other bodies in the solar system, has been violently altered from time to time. The comfortable and assured triumphant revolution, science now tells us, must make way for axial reverses and the “Violent Universe.”

All in the Family

Two of Lehi’s contemporaries, who worked with his friend Jeremiah, have left us most penetrating studies of the axial periods. Writing from Babylon about thirty years after the fall of Jerusalem, Ezra the Scribe recalls other great overthrows when the elements and the enemy combined against humanity. After the fall of Adam he names calamities of the generations of Noah, Abraham, Moses, and David. Like the great Greeks, Ezra can find no good reason for these strange and unwelcome reverses. Though a teacher in Israel, he is unable to give a clear answer to the question of the Holocaust: “Why does God allow the chosen people to be afflicted by people who are even worse than they?” The admonition of the Lord to Nephi—that a brutal enemy would be on hand as “a scourge to thy seed to stir them up to remembrance of me” (2 Nephi 5:25)—does not seem to occur to Ezra or his friend Baruch even though both insist that the Jews are suffering because they have utterly failed to keep the law of Moses and that the earth will suffer as long as the inhabitants continue to fail the test of righteousness. Granted that, however, the sufferings of Israel still seem to be out of proportion to Ezra, and the best answer he can give is from the catalog of stock clerical answers: (1) the ways of God are inscrutable; (2) some things are unavoidable; (3) God still loves his chosen people after all; (4) the misery must go on until a certain preordained number of people have suffered, and (surprisingly) a set time has passed; and (5) it was all foreseen in the council in heaven at the creation, if that is any comfort.

God also tells Ezra that his son the Messiah will appear, to reign on earth for four hundred years. Ezra ends with a report on the ten tribes who, he is able to declare, have recently added another leg to their migration into an even more distant place than their first concealment.

Finally, he asks how long the gap or waiting period is to be between the gloomy end of one dispensation and the happy beginning of the next and is told that there is no gap! As the infant Jacob’s hand grasped the heel of Esau, so that the one followed the other in birth without a break, so there is no interval between axial periods. Ezra is finally instructed to appoint a conventicle of five scribes and with them take forty days to write down everything; twenty-four of their books are to be taught to the people and seventy of them to be reserved in secret by the Quorum of the Wise Ones. Note how carefully the record of the great succession of dispensations has been cultivated.

The book of 2 Baruch is considered the last truly inspired writing of Judaism, immediately followed by what

R. H. Charles calls “an evil and a barren era.” Baruch takes Jeremiah and a company of the righteous to fast and weep with him in the valley of Cedron. His tendency is to blame Adam for everything, though he cites almost verbatim God’s words to Enoch about giving man knowledge, commandments, and agency, all of which he has despised. Even the happy Messianic times on earth, he says, are only temporary as men’s virtues and energies seem now entirely used up. Israel suffers because Israel sins, abusing the elements of earth—the destruction of the environment unfailingly signals axial disaster ahead. He cites Ezra’s principle that the Lord has taken away Zion to leave the earth clear (as in the days of Noah) for a clean sweep of destruction. Sadly, the axial disasters of one time perfectly match those of another occurring centuries later. The number of those born, Baruch assures us, is fixed and a place is prepared for each, and the resurrection is postponed until a set number of souls has been completed. He lists twelve ages of the earth, calling them alternative times of “the black waters” and “the white waters,” which correspond to the early Christian teaching of “the summertime of the just” and “the wintertime of the just.” The black element dominates here, and each period involves the whole earth. The length of the various ages, like the number of spirits, was determined at the council of heaven before the creation. Our comfort is that God is aware of it all, so why complain? He lists the dispensations of Adam, the Watchers, Abraham, Moses, David and Solomon, Hezekiah and Josiah, and another yet to come, that will be the darkest of all and cover the whole earth. He gives us that fools’ progress, the unfolding thought pattern to which our great sixth-century thinkers trace the doom of nations. It runs from mental laziness through a stupor of thought to feelings of insecurity, panic, and paranoia, and finally to hysterical accusations and insane hatred; then it is time for the earthquakes, fires, and famines to ring down the curtain. Yet the Saints shall be spared in a holy land. Baruch concludes with the lament: Zion has been taken from us and all that remains to us is the law of God.

Axial Times or Dispensations?

What is the difference between an axial period and a dispensation? They describe much the same phenomena but each in its own special light. The Oxford English Dictionary says that a dispensation is something bestowed from the permanent stock or storehouse, for example, heaven, the content of which can include spiritual enlightenment as well as substantial blessings. A dispensation is monitored and directed from above, while the normal course of axial history is mindless, mechanical, random, and inevitable, like evolution. That is why world literature is so bleak and hopeless, centered as it is on the futility of the human condition that is brought out unsparingly in the times of great social upheavals and forced migrations.

Dispensations, on the other hand, have a meaning and a purpose. What is the purpose of it all? “We will make an earth whereon these may dwell; And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do the things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them” (Abraham 3:24–25).

The earth then, is a proving ground, a testing place. And for what are we being tested? Again the answer is clear: “I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, I gave unto man his agency; And unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood; . . . and in my hot displeasure will I send the floods upon them” (Moses 7:32–34). The test leading to axial disaster is simply our capacity to love. And what is the purpose of determining that? That “they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; . . . and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads forever and forever” (Abraham 3:26). All are being tested for permanent or at least very long-range assignments in the real world to come. We are here only long enough for testing—this is made glaringly apparent in the wails of protest by Kierkegaard and his existential companions against the injustice of curtailing human life before it even gets interesting. The terribly poignant tragedy which they loudly deplore is that while we come to earth endowed with enormous potential, eagerly excited to develop our manifold powers to the fullest, we are only given a few minutes and then snatched away and dumped in a hole in the ground. It is the cruelest of cruel jokes.

More Intimations of Immortality

But isn’t the coincidence of those two realities of high-powered brains going almost completely to waste in the world, which matches the evolutionary absurdity of brains far more splendidly equipped than mere survival requires (thus confronting Darwin with what he called “an abominable mystery”); does that not give the broadest possible hint that our phenomenal power of thought was developed elsewhere in a time and place where it was needed, and that it is meant to be put into full operation in another environment hereafter? One might say our real existence brackets fifteen minutes of testing. Heraclitus saw the point (“we are in a drunken stupor”) and so did Plato in his doctrine of anamnesis.

The Lord showed Enoch that one “time of wickedness and vengeance” is just like the others though centuries apart and that of all worlds this is the very wickedest. So we have the honor of facing the hardest of tests in the worst of worlds for the greatest of prizes! Professor Erik Hornung, the dean of contemporary Egyptologists, names the great and terrible questions that arise in every axial crisis, namely, “Why is this happening to us? Where is God when we need him? Why is our lifetime so cruelly curtailed?” The first question was a favorite of the indignant Robert Ingersoll, who bitterly chided God for not existing. As a missionary in Germany in the 1920s, I heard the ceaseless refrain, “Es gibt keinen Gott!” Would he have allowed the war and all this? It did little good to remind them of their own folly. That led to the second question, the problem of God’s silence; the Greeks had a word for it—aporia, meaning failure to get through, interpreted as implying that God is either uninterested, unwilling, or, even worse, unable to help us. Again, the dispensations give us a sound explanation exonerating God of cruelty or weakness.

The Joseph Smith book of Enoch, a theodicy, lays it all out, justifying the loudly condemned and misunderstood cruelty of the flood. God actually joins Enoch in weeping for the destruction of mankind (see Moses 7:28–29). This astounding event is also recorded in the writings of the rabbis; in their version, when Enoch asks God why he weeps, he is told to mind his own business. Only the Joseph Smith account has a real answer. The whole heavens weep and all his creations weep at the destruction of a world to which all have contributed and in which all share the same law of love that binds God’s children and here binds the worlds together. The wicked will be imprisoned, having disqualified themselves for advancement, pending their repentance and deliverance at a later time. For the Savior’s work and love are as vast and all embracing as the most distant reaches of existence.

As to the explanation of the Gospels (Matthew 24, Mark 13, Luke 18, Joseph Smith—Matthew in the Pearl of Great Price), they entertain conjecture of a time when the master of the house takes a far journey, leaving his servants in charge. As soon as he departs the more highly placed servants begin to overwork, underpay, and beat the underlings. Now the master of the house has deliberately delayed his coming (aporia), and, when he does come, it is “like a thief in the night” (1 Thessalonians 5:2; 2 Peter 3:10), catching everybody completely off guard, doing their normal thing—a highly reliable test and measure of their merits. The purpose of the test, we are told, was to assign rewards and punishments, each one being sent to the place he deserved; and what they were being tested for was simply their humanity, or, as the scriptures call it, charity.

As an invaluable and neglected handbook of dispensations, the Pearl of Great Price lays out for us the course of seven major dispensations, placing them against a much vaster background of worlds without number. It shows how each dispensation is a restoration, a real breakthrough from above, and then how each is subjected from the beginning to that pressure or test that eventually reaches the breaking point, scattering its people as wanderers over the whole earth. (1) Adam received everything at the outset, but Cain teamed up with Satan and the family “loved Satan more than God” (Moses 5:18), leaving their parents to “[mourn] before the Lord” (Moses 5:27), while the Cainites, prevailing over the Sethians, took the hordes down into the plains to live in the land of Nod, a perpetual wandering. (2) A crash program sent the Watchers onto the scene as missionaries of reform. But even they, “the sons of God,” were enticed by the “daughters of men” (Moses 8:21), fell, and perverted and corrupted everything. Enoch, who preached to the cattlemen on the mountains, led his righteous Zion away to another planet entirely, while “the residue of the people” were removed from the scene in the great purging of the flood. What two solutions could be more totally “axial”? (3) By all accounts (and there are many), Noah’s flood was the greatest axial event of them all, calling for a complete transfusion of blood into the earth through the family of one man. God warned Noah not to expect too much of the New Age or the corrective action of the flood, since “the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth” (Genesis 8:21). Things are not going to improve in the long run. Noah’s sons migrated in various directions, and their offspring were soon proving that dismal proposition to the hilt as the earth became blighted by the terrible winds which dried up large areas of the land, overthrew the tower, and drove the Jaredites and many other tribes on their long, sorrowful treks. (4) Such was the world of Abraham, ever wandering in the deserts as “the famine waxed sore in the land,” planting trees and digging wells for others to enjoy as the greatest benefactor of the human race. He excelled all others in the three departments that Heraclitus lists as man’s greatest achievements: His searching of the cosmos, his right to kingship and priesthood, and his knowledge of the true religion. Though the mightiest of intellects, Abraham realized (again with Heraclitus) that the true work of man is not theoria, contemplation, as the Miletian philosophers, Aristotle, and the rest of the schoolmen taught, but euarestesis, i.e., being of the greatest possible service to one’s fellowman, that all the nations of the earth might call him blessed. (5) A special book of Moses puts us in the eternities amidst “millions of worlds like this.” And was there ever an axial spectacular of afflictions and miracles to match the plagues of Egypt, the wild behavior of the sea, or the sight of Moses standing on the fiery mountain? Most of all, an entire nation wandering forty years in the deserts—how could there be a more complete break with the rest of world civilization, which had already collapsed in its main stronghold, Egypt? Moses broke off his stay with the people; he simply left them, promising in his farewell address that they would go from bad to worse. And so to the trials and scandals and excesses of David, Solomon, and the rest. Some Jewish writers have considered the emergence of Samuel and the priesthood to be the most important axial point in history. The prophets vainly tried to improve things until (6) the time of Christ. The Lord was “despised and rejected . . . ; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief” (Isaiah 53:3). The destruction of Jerusalem, following his departure, was but “the beginning of sorrows” (Joseph Smith—Matthew 1:19), which would last for almost two thousands years until the Lord told (7) Joseph Smith, “<Behold> the world lieth in sin,” and “none doeth good no not one . . . mine anger is kindling against the inhabitants of the earth to visit them according to th[e]ir ungodliness” (see 1831–32 account of Joseph Smith’s first vision as recorded by Frederick G. Williams). Yet presently the Saints were joyfully singing, “The Morning Breaks, the Shadows Flee”—again the best of times and the worst of times.

To recapitulate, through the long, sad history things have been kept at virtually the same level, to provide a fair and equal test for each generation in its turn in this our “time of probation.” For the Pearl of Great Price, our “handbook,” gives us the plan and rationale of the whole thing which is completely missing from the conventional axial system with its relentless procession of “dark centuries” and brief recoveries.

Line by Line

But the main question still remains—why is the whole story broken up into so many distinct and discrete sections and compartments? Moses was given the answer when he was sharply rebuked by the Lord for wanting to see the whole picture. It is true that the object of all science and art is to see the wholeness of things, but it is also true that that can only be done when we know what the things are we are dealing with. Moses was shown “every particle” of the earth which was to be the scene of his mission (I take this to mean all the different types of particles that make up its composition; the scriptures require us to look into no smaller particulates than “the sands of the seashore”). The whole program of our earth life is conveniently divided into neat packages for easier handling or grasping. Every seventh day we are supposed to drop everything and allow the complete and total gap of rest to segment our activities. That is no small matter; no delinquency of Israel could surpass the awful offense and dire retribution of failing to observe the Sabbath. “In it thou shalt not do any work” (Exodus 20:10, emphasis added). For at the end of their work of creation the Godhead announced, “We shall rest for a season.” Sir John Eccles, the great authority on the brain, assures us that awakening from sleep in the morning is as great a miracle as resurrection itself, the break between one episode of existence and the other is absolute. The Egyptians constantly punctuated their activities with festivals of total release from daily care. These recurred with the cycles of sun, moon, and stars—every day, week, month, year, dynasty, aeon, etc., the human race is to take a break. The question of “continuity and discontinuity” is foremost today among students of the axial period. One happy aspect of this refreshing discipline is our opportunity to experience delights which “age cannot wither nor custom stale.” Take the case of Adam, which should reconcile us to the single brief and frustrating span of this earthly episode.

Eternal Lives

Adam’s life is a succession of complete and widely differing careers: (1) It begins with a premortal existence in a world we know not of, first as coplanner and designer of this mortal world; (2) then to building inspector, bearing progress reports to his fellow executives; (3) then as a primitive man living on intimate terms with the animals for an indefinitely prolonged period, since “time was not yet measured unto man.” Apparently it was an uninhibited existence since his next step was (4) marriage under the covenant in a totally new environment, an earthly paradise with unlimited delights for the senses and the palate, all provided “spontaneously,” and all this along with ready access to heavenly visitation. (5) Then comes an awful axial shift, a dreadful wrenching into a lone and dreary world and a harsh environment requiring him to dress in skins (probably including furs) and work his head off, hacking at the stubborn soil to make a living, allergic to the new plant life, deserted by his own children to “mourn before the Lord.” It looks like a dead end, but then Adam is placed here expressly in an environment that will give Satan every opportunity to “try him and to tempt him,” to see whether he will be true and faithful in all things and qualify for advancement hereafter; (6) so what comes next is elevation of his hard earthly life to a new and happier level, as an angel comes and explains the gospel of salvation to Adam and his delighted wife. (7) This effects a return to former glory when his earthly days are ended. (8) And so on to “eternal lives,” a convincing promise completely beyond our reckoning: “Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard” (1 Corinthians 2:9).

Fundamental to the gospel is the bringing together of “all things in one” (D&C 84:100). Of the twelve apostles and the rest of us the Lord said “if ye are not one ye are not mine” (D&C 38:27). Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one, an endless mystery to the theologians. Zion is “of one heart and one mind” (Moses 7:18). The Lord summed up the Ten Commandments in one great commandment, the second being like unto it (cf. Matthew 22:37–40). We have today the Grand Unified Theory (GUT), one theory to explain absolutely everything. But to get it we must know the parts; this oneness must be comprehended “line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little” (2 Nephi 28:30). And while the cosmos is one, and “all things are created and made to bear record of me” (Moses 6:63), yet God marks the fall of a tiny but individual sparrow. If that is not so we are all left out, for what do we count against infinity? The Lord blesses the children of the Nephites “one by one” (3 Nephi 17:21), rather than as a pontiff from the balcony. “A man’s way is One,” say the Arabs. Yet the seven ages of man make him, in the course of his lifetime, seven distinct personae, as Solon and Shakespeare both tell us, in mind, manner, appearance, voice, and mood.

Waiting Their Turn

And so it goes. After recent discoveries that show us the galaxies, the stars, the planets, the face of the earth, the living species on it, all passing from one tentative state of existence to another, we realize that if we are here only for a one-night engagement it can only mean that there is more to come. With all the hustle and bustle and Malthusian overcrowding of the earth, we overlook the manifest truth that the planet was meant for multiple use. To take fullest advantage of its limited space and resources, discrete periods of time have been set apart for the accommodation of different species. Thus one now celebrated population used the planet for millions of years without in any way interfering or competing with us. Then they were abruptly moved out, possibly by the brusque and uncompromising impact of a meteor— the K/T scenario—to make room for a new menagerie of creatures. It should therefore be obvious that provision has been made for every form of life, from the most primitive to the most advanced, to fill “the measure of its creation” (D&C 88:19)—no matter how different from ours—and have joy therein. And they are free to do it without our knowledge or permission; their assigned time on earth is their own. Must I deny their existence simply because I was not told about them? This raises a serious question.

An LDS Dilemma

Every individual has his own private imago mundi, the way he envisages how things were way back then or at any time in the past. It is doubtful whether most people are greatly concerned with the scientific accuracy of the pictures they formed in Sunday School of the Garden of Eden, Noah’s ark, and the creation. But those images had the sanction of everlasting truth when they were taught to the seven-year-old; they were from the Bible. His fundamentalist background leaves no room for things totally alien to the Genesis story. Now every convert to the church brings with him his own imago mundi, which in fact can only be his own and never identical with another’s. What does he do with it when he joins the church? How does he adapt to the new doctrines he has accepted? He may make adjustments and allowances, but old impressions last.

New knowledge added to our old knowledge is in fact a sort of intrusion, even a gentle rebuke, to our present complacency. It renders former convictions outdated, replacing teachings we have become attached to, not by refuting them, but simply by adding to them. But that offends us. The celebrated Adolf Erman reports that when he made a find that could be a valuable contribution to a subject that his colleague, the equally celebrated Eduard Meyer, was working on, the latter, instead of being grateful and delighted, was definitely miffed—must he revamp his already finished conclusions? One of the greatest burdens for the Prophet Joseph was the steady resistance he met when he tried to expand the knowledge of the Saints beyond their fundamentalist stereotypes.

One Act Only?

The most fundamental issue causing this distressing tension was the world of difference between the doctrine of discrete dispensations or axial periods and the mandatory scenario of the one-act play. It is true that they all make one single drama, but it can be expanded infinitely in either direction, past or future, like the mystic pentagram. Ancient nations saw their theogony and past history as a single glorious epic. It furnished the subject of mighty bardic recitations, or great dramatic trilogies, dividing the epic into three basic plays. Each play in turn was divided into acts— we still favor three today—and separate scenes, each emerging when a new character enters onto the stage. The characters’ separate speeches in turn were often famous, standing alone as material for study in the schools or recitations by prize students, or for little Philo to be shown off to company. This is the same principle that divides and subdivides the universe and everything in it: We can view the whole epic history best by seeing it as one scene, one act, or one play at a time, with the whole argument in the background, just as the eye focuses on only one object at a time, while subliminally taking in its essential peripheral ambiance.

But such is not the position of either the most rigid fundamentalists or the doctrinaire evolutionists who are in perfect agreement on one thing; they both accept without question the standard definition of creation as laid down by the schoolmen long ago and expressed by Thomas Aquinas as the emergence of (1) absolutely everything out of (2) absolutely nothing in (3) absolutely no time—an immeasurably brief instant. Recently the popes have favored the Big Bang theory, overlooking the disastrous effect of that supremely axial event in introducing not only one possible world but millions.

The standard definition of creation required the one-act version, since there was no act before it because there was nothing there, and no more acts after it because it has already accounted for everything that ever is or was. This limits our timing to six thousand years; that is all we are allowed. This became the burning issue which divided the two schools. To meet the test of faith, followers of the Bible must renounce any other timescale. The axial experience and the idea of dispensations, on the other hand, not only allow infinite stretches of time in either direction but divide up the whole into smaller epochs, ages, and lifetimes. This is not only necessary for handling but observes the basic rule of science and of art that the whole cannot exist without its parts while each part is a whole in itself, containing countless more parts of the same nature.

This is the idea of dispensations, each containing a complete revelation of the same gospel plan, whatever their number. The favorite argument of the ministers against the assertion that the Prophet Joseph was “blessed to bring in the Last Dispensation” was the third verse of Jude: “the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints.” They conveniently rendered it “once and for all”—there could be no more delivery or dispensation of the gospel. They would usually add Revelation 22:18: “If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book.” Though we are explicitly told that the forbidden additions are those of men, leaving the way open to God to do as he pleases, the reverend gentlemen had to fall back on these two shaky arguments—once and for all and no more!—to prove that the last revelation had been given for all time.

The Jews used the same one-act-only argument to reject Jesus as the Messiah, insisting that he could come only once in the clouds of glory to settle all things forever, while Christ breaks that one-act rule by appearing in glory at least at the transfiguration and the ascension, with promise of yet another such appearance. Our handbook of dispensations, on the other hand, has the Lord appearing gloriously in person to all the founders of the seven dispensations described.

Enter Science Fiction

The one-act, single-creation theory strictly forbids the discovery of other worlds, there being no mention of such in Genesis, while the first creation includes everything that ever was or could be created. This is the only inhabited world, said Aristotle, and man is the only animal endowed with a spirit and rational speech. It has always been maintained by fundamentalists and scientists alike that the discovery of life on other worlds would destroy man’s unique position in the universe, deny this world’s claim to be the center of the cosmos, and minimize the Creator’s singular achievement, making a mockery of the Genesis story. There is nothing to substantiate such a claim in the scriptures, but the one-act theory required it. It may be hard for the present generation to realize that teachers of science (such as my own) were until recently just as fanatically opposed to life on other worlds as were teachers of the Bible classes; for they recognized that for the unimaginably remote possibility of the purely random creation of life ever to have happened more than once was out of the question. So they too joined the one-world congregation.

This tedious controversy that binds the book of Genesis in Spanish boots should mean little to Mormons, released from any obligation to take sides, thanks to their legacy of sweeping and stunning revelations, such pronouncements as “millions of earths like this, . . . [which] would not be a beginning to the number of [God’s] creations” (Moses 7:30), “worlds without end” (D&C 76:112), “I could not see the end thereof” (Abraham 3:12). “There are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man” (Moses 1:35), and “there is no end to my works, neither to my words” (Moses 1:30). This world is actually made after the pattern of “other worlds which we have heretofore created,” all of the same substance and following the same rules of physics. Equally liberating is the position of man in the picture, man who “was [also] in the beginning with God” (D&C 93:29), but always himself, since “Intelligence . . . was not created or made, neither indeed can be” (D&C 93:29). Then why is one “more intelligent than another” (Abraham 3:18)? Everyone can answer that for himself, since no one so far has used or unfolded more than a fraction of his intelligence. To get us out of that situation is God’s main interest, since “The glory of God is intelligence” (D&C 93:36) and his “work and [his] glory” are one and the same—to bring men up to his own level: “to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man” (Moses 1:39). This he does by teaching us: His words are inseparably joined in the revelations with his works, always mentioned together, “and there is no end to my works, neither to my words” (Moses 1:30). The words give purpose and meaning to the works.

To the idea of pleniarism, the doctrine that you cannot have too much of a good thing, we add the principle of multiple use, allowing for untold populations of creatures of the universe, such beings as we dream not of, flourishing communities of anaerobic organisms living at tremendous temperatures and pressures in the unexplored depths of the sea. Thus countless species have enjoyed life, as unaware of our existence as we have been of theirs.

Why have the Mormons hesitated to take advantage of their great legacy of wisdom? Is it a lingering sense of loyalty to our sectarian past? Or is it not rather because we share a common resentment of the swaggering and condescending science majors and professors alike? The old Sunday School teachers, to save face, stood by their guns and dug in their heels, and so the tug-of-war continued between the two royal armies, both lacking ammunition for a decisive victory.

Write Your Own

Mormonism has always welcomed new knowledge from any source. Thus we are invited to be attentive and alert in the temple, with brain and intellect revved up for high performance; everyone is invited and required to form his own imago mundi by being shown various astronomical spectacles, followed by a dramatic presentation when we are confronted on different days by different casts moving in widely varying stage settings, in different costumes, people of different complexions and mannerisms, speaking with different voices and inflections and even different languages. And from all that, each individual must compose his own visions of Genesis. Stephen Hawking assures us that there is just as much imagination in the scientific picture of the world as there is in the religious. We are not only allowed but forced to use our talents and our faith to put ourselves into the picture.

A Parable

When I first came to Utah, the missionaries were showing a Book of Mormon film depicting the journey of Lehi’s family in the wilderness. There were men, women, and small children dressed in the lavish drapes of Hollywood orientalisme, all carrying jars, boxes, and bundles in their arms and on their heads and shoulders as they painfully clambered over rocks and gullies. Eight years of that in the wilderness? Half a day of it would have finished Davy Crockett. When the film was shown in Beirut, the local Saints, who knew all about Arabs, laughed with uncontrollable irreverence. So one day I dropped into Brother Joseph Fielding Smith’s hospitable office, his door always wide open there at the top of the stairs, and pointed out to him that a rich merchant, accustomed to traveling in the desert, would have thought of getting some help in moving his family, at least in carrying those huge black goat’s hair tents under which he was to hold his frequent family councils—all the more so, because everybody else at that time was using donkeys and camels to negotiate the vastness of Arabia Deserta. Brother Smith instantly saw the point and agreed that Lehi’s people must have had beasts of burden, even though they were not specifically mentioned by Nephi. Is there any reason then, short of a special revelation through the highest channels (though such is available to all of us individually), why the details of life in ancient worlds, having no doctrinal significance for us, should not be left open to private fancy, individual research, and even-tempered discussion? There is even a place for the gorgeous, but strictly noncanonical fantasies of an Arnold Friberg.

Axial and Apocalyptic

Scholars have never hesitated to acknowledge close resemblance between axial crises and the awesome promises of apocalyptic literature. Klaus Koch has shown that apocalyptic has always been out of favor with the Christian clergy. The English title of his book, The Rediscovery of Apocalyptic, implies as much, while the original title, Ratlos (helpless) vor der Apocalyptik, indicates their hopeless inability to cope with it. It makes no sense to them because of their one-act fixation. Apocalyptic literature is rich with multiple crises—past, present, and future; the sounding of successive trumpets; the coming and going of hosts; the climactic progression of plagues. The forty-day episodes call for repeated visits of the Lord; in chapters 14–17 of his Gospel, John speaks of the Lord’s much coming and going, leaving and returning, taking others with him, acting as a guide and showing the way. He is one with the apostles who are thereby one with each other and with all who accept their teachings and in turn, with all who accept theirs, etc. The times and places are of great importance; what does “a time, and times, and half a time” (Revelation 12:14) mean? For the simplistic Christian, it all sounds much too complicated; where is the appealing simplicity of the rustic Jesus in our wall pictures? Apocalyptic is deemed by the ministry most fit for the “lunatic fringe.”

With the Jews, all but one coming of the Messiah is unacceptable. Jesus, with at least three appearances in glory— at the transfiguration, at the ascension, and at his promised return in like manner—simply does not qualify.

The Christians find other contradictions. His promise, “Behold, I come quickly” (Revelation 22:7, 12; D&C 35:27), was naturally seen by the schoolmen as arousing the “Great Expectation”—to the early Christians Jesus was to come at any moment. But he did not come quickly! Hence an established teaching of twentieth-century Christian church history is what the scholars call the “Great Disappointment.” It took a generation, they tell us, for the Saints to give up their overwrought, wishful inventive thinking and come around to a more rational, down-to-earth, light-of-day acceptance of the real world of sensible people.

But now comes the rub: as Pascal and Kierkegaard both saw, and the Neo-Freudians now confess, that safe light-ofcommon-day position is really a desperate denial of reality by frightened modern society “tranquilizing themselves with the trivial.”

Fear and Trembling

The inhabitants of the earth are invited to “fear and tremble” in the introductory statement of the Doctrine and Covenants (1:7). “The hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken away from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion” (D&C 1:35). It is not a pleasant thing to contemplate, and it all seems rather brutal. The favorite argument of atheists and the disaffected throughout history is the old complaint of aporia— would a kind God permit such things to happen?

First of all, before we seek an explanation, we might as well acknowledge that such intensely unwelcome things have happened and will happen again. I can still hear my grandmother singing a favorite hymn: “When the earth begins to tremble, Bid our fearful thoughts be still; When thy judgments spread destruction, Keep us safe on Zion’s hill, Singing praises, Singing praises, Songs of glory unto thee . . .” (Hymns, 1985, no. 83). The Hopis say the human race survived the three great axial destructions of the past by taking their stand on a holy mountain and joining in hymns of praise until the strenuous transition passed. And we are told that the Jaredites survived the mountain waves that poured over them, crouched in their small submersible vessels, as they sang hymns together all the way across the ocean (see Ether 6:7–9).

Whether the tremendous trials of the dark times occur or not is no longer a question. As a child, growing up in full view of the great Cascade Peaks, I was beset by apocalyptic imaginings of fiery eruptions. Of course older and wiser people assured us children that any spectacular displays from those old and exhausted heaps of slag would have to wait at least ten thousand years; those things take time. We have not had to wait that long.

On a mission in poor and hungry Germany, less than a decade after World War I, the constant refrain heard from door to door was “Es gibt keinen Gott!”—There is no God! Could a kind God have allowed such suffering? Equally frequent was “Nie wieder Krieg!”—No more war! And before I got out of school they were cheering themselves hoarse for Hitler, and in due time I found myself very much in the front line of another world war. Moral: Impending axial surprises are a distinct possibility.

To This Favor You Must Come

Even the most frightful natural upheavals can be endured, and the lone survivor is a stock figure in literature, as the “remnant” is in the scriptures. What they tell us is best summed up in the two oldest exemplars of axial literature. The first is called the Admonitions of an Egyptian Sage, which Alan Gardiner, who edited the text, declared to be beyond question an authentic eyewitness report of what was happening at the collapse of the Old Kingdom more than forty-four centuries ago, when Egypt took a sudden plunge into 350 years of darkness. The uncanny resemblance to everything in our own time is both an adequate confirmation and commentary. We shall follow Gardiner’s example in selecting, paraphrasing, and comparing the text. The other is the so-called Writing-Board from the British Museum, an even older document reporting the same events.

The opening lines of the Admonitions are only half preserved but give a clear picture of petty crime and public indifference: In the first line a doorkeeper is proposing to his friends, “Let’s go down and knock over (ḥȝq=n) the candy store (bnry.t).” Next line: They refuse to pick up the laundry anymore. . . . They are systematically poaching the birds. . . . These things have been prophesied since the (prehistoric) time of Horus. . . . There are gangs (smȝy.w) everywhere, a man has to have his shield when he goes out to plow . . . have your bow ready—there are criminals afoot everywhere, not a trustworthy man around . . . a man considers his own son an enemy . . . even if the Nile rises as usual nobody is plowing, because nobody knows what is going on . . . women are not having children—it is not the fashion (sḫr.w-tȝ) (1/1–2/4).

There are many bitter jokes about the wild redistribution of wealth: The poor man who couldn’t afford a pair of shoes is now a big property owner . . . laborers are discouraged. . . . Violence is increasing, epidemics are spreading, bloodshed is common, corpses lie in the open. . . . The river has become the new mortuary; the current provides processions for the dead . . . in every town the word is “Let’s beat up (or get rid of, dr=n) the big shots (qn.w).” . . . Men are like gem-birds (pecking around for bits of food), and everybody goes around in filthy clothes . . . the rich man is being robbed by the help [but how did he get his money in the first place?]. People are nauseated by drinking Nile water with blood in it . . . everywhere buildings are burned to the ground, though so far the palace has managed to escape; ships from the south are stranded; the towns are in ruins down there, the whole country is drying up. Crocodiles are fattened by suicides . . . the population is decimated; everywhere you will find somebody who has buried a brother (2/4–14).

The desert is advancing over the land, whole provinces (nomes) are laid waste, undesirable aliens are pouring in across the borders . . . there are no natives left . . . servant girls are seen wearing somebody’s splendid jewelry. . . . There is no more foreign commerce, for the gold is all used up . . . the crafts are deserted. . . . Laughter has died, nobody laughs anymore . . . people of every class say they wish they were dead . . . the children suffer most . . . the trees are being cut down illegally . . . everybody calls for honesty while practicing dishonesty . . . the animals feel it especially, their cries are pitiful to hear . . . what is to be done when a man strikes his brother, a son of his own mother? . . . People have taken to highway robbery, hiding in the bushes at night and murdering their victims . . . what was there yesterday is missing today [cf. Helaman 13:34]. . . . If only the noise and uproar would stop! (3/1–6/1).

I wish the whole human race would just disappear . . . they are eating weeds and drinking ditchwater. Even birds can’t find fruit or vegetables . . . food is even stolen from the pigs. . . . the law courts are looted by mobs . . . the secret rites and ordinances openly divulged . . . the law books are trampled underfoot and kicked to pieces in the alleys . . . the recorders of the granaries have their records snatched, and everybody takes what he wants. The street people make their own legal councils, and the Sacred Council of the Thirty is deposed, their secrets disclosed. . . . There are fires throughout the land lighting the sky by night. The king is deprived of his authority by secret combinations of a few men. . . . The royal residence is overthrown in an hour. . . . A brave man alone hasn’t a chance against the cowardly gangs (6/1–7/5).

There is another long, grimly humorous list of how the poor have become rich and vice versa, for example, the man who could not afford a wooden coffin now owns a tomb, while the one who built it is buried by exposure in the uplands. . . . who slept on the street now lies abed . . . who scavenged in the dump for cloth now wears fine linen . . . who had no loaf now has a barn (though it belongs to somebody else) . . . and why not? if you can get it you deserve it . . . the butchers cheat the gods by supplying geese instead of oxen for sacrifice, and they eat the meat they have been paid to prepare for others . . . cattle are running wild everywhere with no one to round them up . . . there are no concerned overseers in business or government. . . . those in power are never told the real condition of the people, so everything goes to ruin. . . . fields are reaped, but it is not reported . . . for housing, Egyptians are now making their own tents like the hill people . . . there is no income for the palace; the guard of the warehouse is knocked out, but the thieves find the bins empty in the king’s storehouse . . . all this because of machinations of the secret enemy (7/8–10/12).

Gardiner, on the other hand, sees a passionate complaint against God’s aporia: Why has not Re created all men good alike? If he had done so, the present evils would never have arisen. Yet he describes the righteous ruler as the Good Shepherd (Herdsman) of Mankind. It is because God failed in the beginning that the human race is hopelessly flawed . . . this goes for the king too: “Is he sleeping? His power is not to be seen” (11/11–12/6). Many believe this was the ninety-sixyear-old Pepi II. Though the king has all the official requirements, yet noise, confusion, and general violence prevail throughout the kingdom. Then a direct charge against the king: “You have deceived us!” Next a description of a kingdom that could be a Zion (13/9–14/5). Here the good and bad societies are contrasted as in the Shield of Achilles, a scene of pious festivity and contentment. Next he chides the Egyptians for not standing up to the Asiatic invaders and again accuses the aged and incompetent king.

We noted in the priesthood manual that the axial switch of 600 B.C. saw the end of the old sacral kingship everywhere.

And here we find the same thing happening twelve hundred years before!

Déjà Vu

The author of the Egyptian Writing-Board (BM 5645) bitterly complains that the axial horrors of the time present nothing new to write about: I have said that which I have seen, and from the first generation down to the present time they are all the same. I wish I had something new to explain my present anguish. If there is change, it is always for the worse, increasing confusion and waste (entropy). Everyone suffers, everything is going downhill, but everybody puts up with it . . . people get up every morning and go through the usual routine; no one has the wisdom or concern to speak up—nobody cares that much. I don’t see any way out. . . . The stronger will always prey on the weaker . . . speaking out just makes trouble. You can’t get anywhere with stupid people; everybody listens only to himself.

The Merciful Plan

Especially effective among the complaints brought before and against God (the rabbinical Vorwurf an Gott) has been the charge of the killing of innocent animals and children in the flood. When Adam complained about it in heaven, God told him he could not even begin to imagine the extent of God’s own love for all his creatures. And to Ezra, championing the animals, he explains that animals have no conception of death, the terror of which lies all in the anticipation. They don’t know about it until it strikes them and it is over. There is the classic example of the calmly feeding mastodons, frozen hard with their flesh still edible and their mouths full of fresh buttercups.

The same mercy is shown to humans. All the recurrent “times of wickedness and vengeance” follow the same pattern. We have noted from the first how the axial change is always very swift and sudden. As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of Man and also in our own “days of wickedness and vengeance” (Moses 7:60). It has happened before, and each time with business as usual: “They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all” (Luke 17:26–27). If it must come, it is made quick and painless. Likewise, in the great axial age of Abraham, “They did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all” (Luke 17:28–29). Whether by a tsunami or a firestorm, or by both as in the Book of Mormon, death is almost instantaneous by suffocation. It could not be more merciful. We are told of occasions when the angels protested God’s delay in smiting a sinful community, but he put them off, as he did the apostles at Capernaum, saying that some might yet repent, and all must have the full benefit of the doubt.

The Extended Hand of Mercy

The accusing question arises—what comes after all that destruction? What is gained by it? You will find the complaints in all the literature—Egyptian, Greek, Latin, Babylonian, Hebrew, Eddic, Bardic, Romantic, modern—all of it is the product of a series of axial disasters, teaching us that man is bound to find himself in hopeless situations no matter when or where he lives. Then again it all goes back to the Chadwicks’ “Epic Milieu” when natural forces, especially the weather, pushed men over the brink and sent whole nations, notably grass-dependent nomads of the “Heartland” of Central Asia into migration toward rich and settled civilizations around the coastal periphery and so threw the world into turmoil.

Koestler’s flawed evolution puts one in mind of a machine that is missing a vital part. Nothing can be done until the part is supplied. Who will deliver it—and us? Theologians today are fond of the word breakthrough—such must be the very nature of religion; they have at last recognized that we cannot make it all up ourselves, that college courses cannot cut it. It must be brought from above. The universal note of despair that runs through all of the world’s literature proclaims our helplessness. Even the promise of the nineteenth-century superman and twentieth-century science has yet to make us safer and wiser. By precept and example the Prophet Joseph alone shows us the astonishing reality of our situation: We were meant to be tried beyond our strength; the test was intentionally made too hard for us!

The late Karl Popper explained that to test a piece of machinery or material you must do your best to break it, putting it under merciless pressure until you have passed the breaking point; otherwise the test is incomplete—an easy test is no test. So “in this world ye shall have tribulation (thlipsis, lit. “keeping the pressure on”); but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world” (John 16:33). Was the crucifixion to be called off, then? No, neither was the tribulation of the disciples. Yet the word is, “Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid” (John 14:27). This is how it must be, and everything is made clear.

Merciful toward afflicted mankind on earth—even the guilty ones of “the times of wickedness and vengeance”—the Lord also brings them the greatest of gifts in the next world. Though, admittedly, Grace does not ask anything in return, still, to be forgiven outright, without even an opportunity to repent, is to be treated like a feebleminded child who, whatever he does, knows no better. The Lord, on the other hand, gives all of them the opportunity to prove themselves independent and responsible spirits, able to earn forgiveness and to return to the great plan of salvation by seconding the work of the Savior with all their own might, mind, and strength, not because he needs our help, but that he graciously permits it.

So he goes down to those disobedient spirits in prison, victims of sundry axial punishments, teaches them the words of life, laying out the whole plan for them. Putting them all on their good behavior, he arranges for their baptisms and endowments and so gives all a chance to work out their own salvation. In the end, the weeping Enoch saw “all things, even unto the end of the world . . . and received a fulness of joy” (Moses 7:67).

22

The Word of Wisdom: A Commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 89

This Sunday School lesson was given in the Manavu Ward Gospel Doctrine class in 1979.

The Word of Wisdom is so familiar that we can cover it in a hurry, except for a few neglected patches. First, it is a “greeting; not by commandment or constraint,” but a “word of wisdom, . . . the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all saints in the last days” (D&C 89:2). The covenants we make are eternal, but we’re not going to be worried about tea, coffee, and tobacco in the world hereafter. In ages to come, smoking will not be a serious problem with any of us; it hardly is even now. The Word of Wisdom is a temporal law to supply us during this life, and this is the way it was taken.

The Word of Wisdom is temporal and temporary; it doesn’t belong to the order of the eternal gospel. Yet it is no less the will of God. We do not covenant and promise to keep the Word of Wisdom because our promises and covenants are eternal. But we are bound while we’re here, so it is not secondary in importance. Still we often make a big fuss about the Word of Wisdom, while ignoring the other commandments. President Joseph F. Smith used to say that we make the Word of Wisdom a subject of religious hobbyism.1 “As long as I keep the Word of Wisdom, that’s the thing,” someone may say; and then preach that and nothing else. That is not the fullness of the gospel; it is a minimal requirement—a principle with a promise, a first step. Though it’s no great achievement, you do get a reward for it. Others keep it on the whole better than we do, for example, the Seventh-day Adventists; yet it is not the gospel.

We have been warned and forewarned against the “evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men” (v. 4). Today this is recognized as the promotion of harmful products. But where do we draw the line on harmful products? And where do we strike a balance between harmful products and the money they bring in? At one time, all watches had luminescent dials on them; it was a great blessing to be able to see the time in the dark. What did we do with luminous dials? We junked them because the disadvantage of radioactivity was greater than the advantage of luminescence, and we have been getting along since without such a convenience. It’s the same with the exhortations of the Word of Wisdom. We can do without certain things.

Wine and strong drink are only for the sacrament (v. 5). Make your own (v. 6). Tobacco may be used only for medicine. Discover its use by experimentation. An athletic trainer may use tobacco quite effectively for sprains and bruises, but only with judgment and skill (v. 8). Skill means experience (again, wisdom). President Joseph F. Smith said that the Word of Wisdom means just that—“wisdom.” One must judge for oneself. A commandment, on the other hand, means “You must do this!” The early brethren included chocolate and cocoa among the hot drinks, but in those days people drank them extremely hot (v. 9).

“All wholesome herbs” (v. 10)—what makes an herb “wholesome”? When herbs are for the “constitution, nature, and use of man” (v. 10)—if you know how to use them: “Every herb . . . and every fruit in the season thereof” (v. 11). Joseph Fielding Smith used to say, “We put up our preserves, we freeze our vegetables—when they are ripe,” not when they are green, nor when they are rotten. We freeze them in the proper season. We are not asked to eat peas only in the three weeks when peas are perfect for picking. We can preserve them in season, not prematurely.

Still we get cranks in this business. So let us note, “with prudence” (v. 11). There’s the answer to the cranks, for prudence means “providence, foresight—and thanksgiving.”

We are to eat meat “sparingly” (v. 12). Again, sparing is a good word. It means “sparing God’s creatures.” Meat is to be used “with thanksgiving” (v. 12), not with gluttony, which is one of the national weaknesses (obesity being one of our national diseases) and one of the seven deadly sins. According to section 49 of the Doctrine and Covenants, we have a right to eat meat. The family that needs a deer to get through the winter has a right to it. The Lord will not deny them, but he is also pleased with those who forbear. They need to eat meat only in times of starvation, winter, cold, and famine (vv. 13, 15). Starve means to die of cold, as well as of famine. The Saints need meat to see them through the winter and to restore their fainting strength. There is, for example, the miracle of the quails in 18462—game only in times of winter and excess of hunger. However, supplies are limited, and we cannot afford to hunt promiscuously the year round. At the first sight of buffalo in Iowa—the plain was covered with buffalo as far as the eye could see—Brigham Young called the brethren together and told the brethren not to shoot one, unless they absolutely needed it. And this restraint turned out to be a great blessing to them.3

Grain is the staff of life—the underpinning of the whole cycle. The angiosperms are encapsulated, highly concentrated nourishment supplied from the insects right on up through the food chain (they like to share it with us also). It’s not an exclusive diet, though. We lean on it more than anything else, but the Doctrine and Covenants tells us the importance of herbs, of fruit, and of meat, which are essential too (cf. vv. 10–12). All grains, fruits, and berries are good for man (v. 16), though they must be processed in some way. The Indians used berries and acorns extensively, but they had to process or wash them, or they would be eating deadly poisons. They found by experience how to treat these foods, and they used many things that we don’t think useful at all. Tommy Martin (former dean of biological sciences at Brigham Young University) spent his days looking for edible and useful herbs in the lot around his house in Provo. He found 128 species growing right around his house that people could use for some purpose of nutrition, medicine, or otherwise. Although these things are all around us, we know very little about them, because their use is something that requires much skill.

Finally there is the promise (vv. 18–21). It is not part of mortality for man to be immune from suffering, but the promise does guarantee that things will be as they should be. The main thing about the Word of Wisdom is that it represents a new way of life. Though we often don’t realize it, we find in the Journal of Discourses that tea, coffee, tobacco, and liquor were all a part of the Saints’ way of life,4 though they were luxuries, a form of indulgence, a form of gracious living. They are things we really don’t need, because they are stimulants or narcotics. The early Saints were forced to give them up, perhaps when they ran out of supplies; the Saints in southern Utah had no trouble at all with the Word of Wisdom because they couldn’t get any of the stuff. They were forced into a new way of life.5

We read in a new book on alcohol in American history that in the nineteenth century, it seems that all Americans imbibed a pint of liquor every day.6 That was a perfectly normal way of life. The Word of Wisdom was absolutely necessary to effect a break with those customs, for the coming forth of the kingdom in these days demanded it. Brigham Young conceded that the older generation was too far gone; we must begin with the younger generation. The older ones need their stimulants; they must have their coffee, etc.7 Ezra T. Benson said in 1855 that this was a whole new way of life—a cultural revolution which the Saints have not yet accepted:

When we first heard the revelation upon the Word of Wisdom many of us thought it consisted merely in our drinking tea and coffee, but it is not only using tea and coffee and our tobacco and whisky, but it is every other evil which is calculated to contaminate this people. . . . I thank my heavenly Father that we have escaped thus far the contaminating influence of the Gentiles.8

George Albert Smith said the same thing in that conference: the Word of Wisdom sifts the people, though they do not realize it. How carefully they are being tested—it’s a gradation, so to speak, a cultural revolution. Their treatment of animals is also a test.9 And in the same year, Brigham Young again observed: “The people have laid the foundation of short life through their diet, their rest, their labor, and their doing this, that, and the other in a wrong manner, with improper motives, and at improper times.”10 He advises moderation. Further,

Suppose I happen to say “Come, wife, let us have a good dinner today”; what does she get? Pork and beef boiled, stewed, roasted, and fried, potatoes, onions, cabbage, turnips, custard, eggs, pies of all kinds, cheese, and sweet-meats. Now grant that I and my wife sit down and overload our stomachs, until we feel the deleterious effects of it from the crowns of our heads to the soles of our feet, the whole system is disturbed in its operations, and is ready to receive and impart disease. A child begotten under such a condition of the systems of its parents, is liable to be born with a tabernacle subject to a life of pain and distress.

Will all the women hearken to this plain statement? No, you might as well talk to the wild geese that fly over us.11

In a speech given in Provo on the Word of Wisdom, Brigham Young added, “It has been an organic part of the Church teachings at all times. Like the temple garments, it is a protection. It is an admonition to wisdom, giving appetites, desires, and passions with boundaries, and is to be considered with discretion. It is a protection from evil and designing men and from many things that can harm us”—things that are habit forming.12

I will now talk about a good example of religious hobbyism. “In 1833, the Saints commenced to build a Temple in Kirtland. . . . A mere handful of Saints commenced that work, but they were full of faith and energy. . . . In a few weeks, [however], some of them apostatized; the trials were too great, the troubles were too severe. . . . For instance, a certain family, after having travelled a long journey, arrived in Kirtland, and the Prophet asked them to stop [and stay] with him until they could find a place. Sister Emma, in the meantime, asked the old lady if she would have a cup of tea to refresh her after the fatigues of the journey, or a cup of coffee. This whole family apostatized because they were invited to take a cup of tea or coffee, after the Word of Wisdom was given.”13 But after all, it was just a stimulant for an old lady, not a coffee bust.

Amasa Lyman once remarked that the Word of Wisdom is just that, a wise “principle with promise, . . . a rule of conduct,” a way of progress, which is progressive repentance. A workaholic is as culpable as the alcoholic: “Do not work yourselves to death”; the Saints “should be temperate in all things, in the exercise of labor, as well as in eating and drinking.”14 The positive side of it is that we should go to bed early and rise early, so that our bodies and minds are rested. We should not work ourselves to such exhaustion that we need stimulants. If we overwork, we break the Word of Wisdom, because we force ourselves to fall back on drugs to give us a pickup.

Also, the Word of Wisdom is nothing to flaunt before the world; it’s merely a means of assisting us in salvation and work for the human race. In 1867, Brigham Young said that the situation was not good in the Church. Then he reminded the Saints that the Word of Wisdom should not become a fetish; “the Word of Wisdom is one thing, and ignorance, superstition, or bigotry are another.” He tells the story of an elder in Nauvoo who refused to administer to the sick when he saw a teapot in the house! (There was no tea in the teapot, only some herbs.)15 I have a friend who refused to use Carnation milk because it was advertised to be used with coffee. That’s being too puristic.

Erastus Snow, later that year, counseled “not to make [the Word of Wisdom] a hobby to the exclusion of everything else, so as to disgust the people, but in the true spirit of the Gospel seek to bring this matter home to the hearts and understandings of the people. . . . Feel after those who may be stupid and ignorant.”16 Instruction in these things is the important thing. Stimulants and narcotics are necessary at times, though this does not license their general use. Those who covenant have no option but to keep the Word of Wisdom. Erastus Snow also taught that like money, it’s right to have pharmaceutics sufficient for our needs, but they can be poison if overdone. More than that, they can be deadly. George Q. Cannon suggested that not only stimulants, but extreme variety, or any diet or food fad, exacted a “penalty.”17 This appears to go for cholesterols, synthetics, sugar-free diets, and all sorts of similar things.

“Having food and raiment let us be therewith content,” says Paul to Timothy (1 Timothy 6:8). We can get in trouble if we start overdoing things. Orson Pratt said that a man should not constrain his family to obey the Word of Wisdom; every person will have to give an account of his doings.18 Man may keep the Word of Wisdom as far as tea, coffee, and tobacco are concerned and still come up short. If he wishes and contends to be right, he must convey this together with all the commandments of the Word of Wisdom, for if you keep the Word of Wisdom but don’t walk in obedience, you will not receive health to the navel and marrow to the bones (v. 18). Obedience includes regulating our thoughts and all our doings.

In the sermons of the General Authorities from the beginning, it becomes increasingly apparent that the Word of Wisdom is far more advanced than we have realized. When new nutritional steps are taken today, we often find that the Word of Wisdom anticipated it. For example, in 1870, Brigham Young asked, Why are these things so popular, and why are they so bad? “The poisonous or narcotic properties in spirits, tobacco and tea are the cause for their being so much liked by those who use them.”19 They are habit forming. Their most dangerous effects make them so. Further, “There is no doubt whatever that the food we eat, and which is absolutely necessary to sustain us, contains poison; . . . but . . . it is not injurious, and we eat it without harm. But where we find so much poison in the articles the people will become very strongly attached to them in a very short time.”20

The important thing is the state of mind; one must be sober and clear-headed to receive revelation. Narcotics of any kind beget delusion, unreality. That’s why we don’t indulge in any excesses. We don’t have in the temple ceremony the music, the lights, the colors, the incense, the bells, and the organs. It is stark, cold, and sober, and it has to be like that.

Orson Pratt says further:

Take the Word of Wisdom, which is given for our benefit and temporal salvation. It is true, disobedience to that is not so gross a sin as some others; but still, it is given for our temporal salvation, and should be observed. . . . Preach it every two weeks, or at least every month, to persuade this people to hearken to it; and yet they know it is the word of the Lord. . . .

They go away, after hearing a most glorious discourse upon this and other revelations, and perhaps they will keep the Word of Wisdom for two or three days; but it makes their head ache, and then they take a little tea, and it does them good for the moment, and they think the Lord don’t [sic] know what they need as well as they do. . . . But it is such a trial! It must be a terrible trial, which the Lord said the weakest of all that are or can be called Saints could obey.21

The Word of Wisdom is necessary for unity and cooperation. It’s a form of common sense and honesty. Drugs, luxuries, self-indulgence, fashions, and wealth—they all go together. The Word of Wisdom is simply a warning to beware of the world, and although it is a temporal revelation, the keeping of it will help us to keep the more eternal covenants we have made with our Heavenly Father.

Notes

^1. Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1919), 117.

^2. Comprehensive History of the Church, 3:136.

^3. Ibid., 3:175.

^4. Journal of Discourses, 13:276–77; cf. 12:156.

^5. Ibid., 12:52.

^6. See W. J. Rorabaugh, The Alcoholic Republic: An American Tradition (New York: Oxford University Press, 1979), 225–33.

^7. Journal of Discourses, 2:271.

^8. Ibid., 2:358, 359.

^9. Ibid., 2:362, 366.

^10. Ibid., 2:269.

^11. Ibid., 2:269–70.

^12. [We have been unable to locate the source for this speech—eds.]

^13. Journal of Discourses, 2:214.

^14. Ibid., 3:176.

^15. Ibid., 12:27; cf. 27–28.

^16. Ibid., 12:176.

^17. Ibid., 12:224.

^18. Ibid., 3:19.

^19. Ibid., 13:276.

^20. Ibid.

^21. Ibid., 3:18–19.

23

A Commentary on the Gospel of Matthew

This address was given in Chattanooga, Tennessee, in August 1987. A concluding, sketchy, chapter-by-chapter survey of the Gospel of Matthew has been deleted.

More than any other subject, the field of theology and religion is favored by a wealth of periodicals and reviews. Every minister wants to have his day and so nothing is easier for the student than to find out what is going on in the field of religion in any particular year. I have always made it a practice at the end of every six months to catch up with the periodical literature, but for three years I have been interested in other things. Not to worry, as I say, the stuff is all there. So I went to one of the best and most representative reviews—the Expository Times, the interdenominational century-old British guide to contemporary thinking in the churches. I reviewed the issues from 1983 to 1986 and found what I expected: more than ever the ministers, for all their fervid rhetoric, just don’t know what to believe. The New Testament is simply inadequate to tell the whole story.

After all, the Lord’s words can be read in half an hour, yet John tells us that all the world would not contain the books if it was all written down. The clergy have always been reluctant to dwell upon this extreme paucity of material—understandably, since it is all they have. Today it is still being asked: If the Bible gives clear, infallible, and complete answers, why the disagreement everywhere? Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish writers cover the vagueness of their message with a massive lubrication of words which allows them to slip through tight places. They still insist that God has spoken his final word; they deny him the privilege of adding to his own words even if he wants to, while they go on with their commentaries, translations, reinterpretations, explanations, etc., adding here a little and there a little, line upon line, precept upon precept to God’s word. If such contributions have nothing to add, then why do they come forth in such volume and exuberance?

From time to time amid the toilsome scholarship and labored eloquence, someone is bound to ask, as Irenaeus did long ago in his arguments with the gnostics, “Why not forget all this play of abstraction, allegory, mysticism, and metaphor and simply take the words of the Bible literally as they stand?”1 At once comes the knee-jerk reply of a dozen deep thinkers, “Who is going to tell us exactly what the words do mean; since when have the doctors agreed on them?” Today as ever, the test cases for literalism are, as you might know, the creation story and the resurrection story. We are told much more about the resurrection than about the creation; the whole of creation mind you, of heaven and earth, angels, men, animals, planets, elements, galaxies, the works, is all accounted for in a page and a half, all “instantaneously and simultaneously.” Yet strangely, the ministers who gulped down that camel with ease, gag and strangle on the resurrection. Since ancient times the doctors of the church have been loathe to accept it literally, and they still are.

The Gospel of Matthew

I have only time to discuss one or two issues today, and I will confine myself to only one Gospel, that of Matthew, since that is as far as I have got in my Gospel Doctrine class. Let us make a quick survey leading up to today’s subjects for discussion—the Beatitudes (upon which books are still pouring forth) and the Lord’s Prayer.

At the outset of Matthew we are introduced to a number of miraculous happenings; an article appearing very recently by a learned divine finds the virgin birth totally unacceptable. The star of Bethlehem on the other hand, since it may have been a real phenomenon, is repeatedly rediscovered, most recently as a conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn.

In chapter 3 we read that John the Baptist had a large following and that he denounced the Pharisees and Sadducees, just as Jesus was to do later, for failing to bring forth fruits. He baptized Jesus (with the testimony of the Father—“This is my beloved Son”), who then took over the work. John the Baptist had come as Elijah, the perennial predecessor of the Messiah.

Next we have the Lord’s personal confrontation with Satan (chap. 4), who as ever wants to give the orders. A remarkable feature of Matthew is that almost every episode of the story follows immediately upon the one preceding it, connected with a temporal adjective: “when,” “at that time,” “while.” The whole story is an unbroken chain of connected and necessary incidents. Thus immediately after Satan had sought out and tried to enlist the Lord as a follower, the Lord himself begins enlisting those who are to become the pillars of the Church—Peter, Andrew, James, and John (Matthew 4:18–22); all were to remain true and faithful, his intimate confidants and the leaders of his Church. Immediately thereafter we find Jesus preaching and healing “throughout all Syria” with vast multitudes following him (Matthew 4:24–25), a phenomenon not unfamiliar in Jewish history. But unlike other leaders of the people, Jesus does not exploit his advantage when he has the crowd passionately pursuing him. He leaves them and goes off usually to a mountain by himself, where his disciples come to join him, where he discusses with them intimate things, “it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given” (Matthew 13:11). He is giving them instructions for their work in building up the Church.

The Beatitudes

The first twelve verses of chapter 5 are the Beatitudes. They answer the question Who is qualified to be admitted to the Church?—for the “kingdom of heaven” is, as we shall see, the way the Church is regularly designated hereafter. Those who are qualified for membership are “the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven”—that is, they rate the kingdom. Likewise qualified are those that mourn and need comfort, and the meek who shall inherit the earth (that is, hereafter when the kingdom comes to its own). Those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, who are eager to accept the message and be accepted—who else could be better qualified? Likewise deserving are the merciful who shall be paid in kind, the pure in heart, they alone whose confidence waxes strong in the presence of God (having no hidden vices to rankle the subconscious with guilt), those who are persecuted for being righteous, and finally those who are thoroughly unpopular in our present society; what they can hope for is “your reward in heaven” (Matthew 5:12). Notice that these are all low-profile people, the same that Isaiah recommends for blessings, having the exact opposite of all the qualities that make for success in our present world.

In your King James Bible verse 13 is rightly marked as beginning a new section; the Lord is now addressing the disciples as the leaders of the Church. He addresses them as the salt of the earth, of which only a little is needed but is of prime significance; if they cannot function properly everything falls flat. It is the disciples, not the milling crowds that are the salt of the earth—one only needs a little, but it makes all the difference. Then in a new section, which is also marked beginning with verse 17, he reminds them that there is only one law and one gospel. He contrasts them with the leaders of the Jews, the scribes and Pharisees (v. 20). Then he gives them strict rules of behavior and emphasizes their high responsibility.

The Lord’s Prayer

In chapter 6 he tells his disciples how they must differ from other leaders and be examples to the people, and then in a miracle of condensation he sets forth the purpose and rationale of the Church. It is all in the Lord’s Prayer:

Our Father (Matthew 6:9). We know that he is Jesus’ Father—but ours as well? Yes, but the world will not accept it; even now the pious authors go into all sorts of contortions to get around it. But it was the same in Jesus’ own day. Jesus was put to death for the specific claim that God was his Father, that he was the literal Son of God. As we read later on, “Tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God. Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: . . . Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; . . . What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death” (Matthew 26:63–66).

God as a Father is rarely mentioned in the Old Testament: at times, however, in the New Testament the concept is everywhere: My Father, Your Father, the Father in Heaven, etc. What is wrong? Either Christ is teaching a drastically new doctrine—and that is what the scribes and Pharisees accused him of, or else the Jews have strayed from an older gospel and lost it. Which was it? The prophets leave us in no doubt. Their constant refrain is that Israel has strayed from the law and broken the everlasting covenant. The opening words in Isaiah are those of an offended Father: “I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib: but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider” (Isaiah 1:2–3). And the last prophet, Malachi, writes: “A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a father, where is mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my fear? . . . O priests, that despise my name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised thy name?” (Malachi 1:6).

Which art in heaven (Matthew 6:9). Is heaven a place? Of course scholars all say that this is just a figure of speech, but whole chapters of John (14–17) labor to make it as explicit as possible that we are all in the same family with God as our Father. A few years ago the journals displayed a number of studies on the locus, place, or situation in the Bible—that is, the coming and going of angels, and especially of the Lord: “Where I go, ye cannot come . . . for I go to the Father . . . to prepare a place for you . . . they watched until he was out of sight . . . in this same manner shall he return,” etc. (cf. John 8:22; 14:12; 14:2; Acts 1:11).

The problem of place and the best possible introduction to its meaning in the Lord’s Prayer is Solomon’s prayer at the dedication of the temple (see 1 Kings 8:13–49):

21. . . . I have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant. . . . 22. [Then he] stood before the altar . . . and spread forth his hands toward heaven: . . .

27. . . . Will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded? 28. Yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant, . . . 29. That thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even toward the place of which thou hast said, My name shall be there: that thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thy servant shall make toward this place. 30. And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place: and hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place. ...

31. If any man trespass . . . and an oath be laid upon him, . . . and the oath come before thine altar. . . . 32. Then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge thy servants.

33. When thy people . . . have sinned against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and confess thy name, and pray, and make supplication unto thee in this house: 34. Then

hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people. . . .

35. When the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, . . . If they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin. . . . 36. Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants.

37. If there be in the land famine, . . . pestilence, . . . locust, . . . if their enemy besiege, . . . whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness . . . 38. What prayer and supplication . . . be made by any man, . . . which shall know every man [every man involved] the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his [own] hands [individually or collectively] toward this house: 39. Then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive. . . .

41. Moreover concerning a stranger, that is not of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far country for thy name’s sake; 42. (For they shall hear of thy great name . . . ) when he shall come and pray toward this house; 43. Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, . . . that all people of the earth may know thy name, to fear thee, . . . that they may know that this house, which I have builded, is called by thy name.

44. If thy people go out to battle . . . whithersoever thou shalt send them, and shall pray . . . toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house that I have built for thy name: 45. Then hear thou in heaven their prayer . . . and maintain their cause. 46. If they sin, . . . 47. [are] carried captives, and repent, . . . 48. [then they] pray unto thee toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, the city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name: 49. Then hear thou their prayer . . . in heaven thy dwelling place.

The situation is clear: God does not live in the temple; neither do his people. They do not go there to see him, and he does not come down to meet them there, but when they wish to make serious contact with him they face the temple and concentrate their thoughts in that direction. Instead of his person they deal with him through that all-important name. Now consider how the Lord here instructs the disciples: “After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven” (Matthew 6:9). God is not described here as being everywhere, as his influence is, nor described as dwelling in our hearts. This is a personal relationship between child and parent; he is expressly referred to as “our Father in heaven.”

The temple is the common place of contact which God has appointed for his people to come to make a covenant with him, and, if they are afar off, to focus their thoughts. There must be a central place. It is only a building, but men are only men, and God knows what he is doing.

Hallowed be thy name (Matthew 6:9). Hallowed means respected, acknowledged, reverenced, its authority held in awe. In Solomon’s prayer as in the Lord’s Prayer, the name, like the building, is something to focus on. In a person’s absence we must have his name to identify him to others and keep him in mind ourselves. If you have never seen the king face to face or do not remember having met him and can’t be certain exactly what image you should hold of him, then the name is all important. You do not know exactly how others think of him or what their relationship to him is, but the one thing you have in common with them and must always hold to is the name.

Thy kingdom come (Matthew 6:10). A kingdom is a region in which a king’s will is not only law but is reverenced, respected, and obeyed, as God’s will has rarely been on this earth. When God’s kingdom comes, and not until then will thy will be done, not occasionally by fits and starts, and here or there as it is now, but as the sole guiding principle of all action, right here in earth, not as it is done now, but totally and completely as it is in heaven. The community in which God’s will is acknowledged and obeyed is the Church, and there is no doubt that that is what is meant by the kingdom of heaven, as is clearly explained in the next chapter. The kingdom is the Church as it should be.

Give us this day our daily bread (Matthew 6:11). This next verse looks like a sudden break, a shift from the celestial and eternal order to very mundane and practical things. In a famous novel Joseph Conrad describes a ship sinking in a terrible storm—a sailor is clinging to the stays on the mast and shouting the Lord’s Prayer at the top of his voice. The author, who is describing his own experience, says he found it a singularly odd time and place to be worrying about daily bread. But this apparent shift of ground is absolutely vital, since this is a prayer of people living in the world. “Thy kingdom come” is an optative, a wish, it has not yet happened; things are not on earth as they are in heaven where God’s will is everyone’s will. What is preventing it, what is holding up this consummation so devoutly to be wished? It is that other plan by which men are in bondage to each other, dependent on each other, in debt to each other—an obstacle to the kingdom which the law of Moses removes in the only way it can be removed, by the direct bounty of God and “the Lord’s release” in which all human debts were canceled.

It is the need for daily bread that enables men to exploit each other and deny free agency. If God does not provide daily bread, most people will have to sell their lives for bread. He does not want that; he wants us to have it as a gift. A gift does not have to be earned—other things must be earned, and they present a much harder challenge, but not the elements for preserving life. Air and water are more vital even than food, and some are trying to make even them marketable, controlling and holding back supply until their price is met. Eternal salvation must be earned, but the chance to take the test is given to all freely; you do not buy a gift from a giver or engage in a free-for-all to see who can grab the most of those gifts which a generous Father has provided for us all. The prime source of food in Israel, as everywhere else, is the rain, and the Lord tells us in Matthew that he lets his rain fall equally on the just and the unjust alike, the deserving and the undeserving. His direct gift of food to Israel was manna. The manna was literally daily bread, replenished fresh each day, but lasting for just one day only— after 24 hours it rotted and stank and could not be hoarded; it was not negotiable, no futures, no sales. Is there a subtle implication in the fact that when used for business it would be a foul and dirty thing? (I seem to recall lines about filthy lucre, the deceitfulness of riches, thy money perish with thee, etc.) And that went on for forty years? Was God trying to ruin their characters by giving them all a free lunch? No, they had plenty of tests to undergo, but they were not tests in acquiring stuff or negotiating deals, as we see in what immediately follows.

And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors (Matthew 6:12). Some translators have obligingly tried to soften the passage by turning debt and debtors into the generic “trespasses,” but what is here used is strictly business language referring to money owed. God recognized that Israel could not be free without the Lord’s release. Which meant that all debts were canceled every seven years. There was simply no other way; otherwise, men inevitably lose freedom of action, bound by debts both owed and owing. We ask God to forgive us what we owe him in the exact proportion as we forget the debts that are owed to us. This theme is repeated in Matthew in some powerful parables. And what do we owe God? Everything, says King Benjamin. Though a man should work zealously in the kingdom all day long everyday, he would still remain an “unprofitable servant”—that is, consuming more than he produces. We are all in God’s debt, says Benjamin, and forever shall be, which means that our only hope is to show him how much we want to be delivered by following his instructions and canceling all debts to us. The law of the release was the only way to get out of the debtors’ prison in which men keep each other. It is God’s will that men cancel debts to each other, and until they cease holding debts, accounts, mortgages, bonds, etc., over each other, God’s kingdom will never be established on earth as it is in heaven.

But why would God allow such a state of things to persist since plainly he is against it? It is a problem that baffled the doctors of the Church and remained unsolved—the problem of evil: God is either weak because he cannot prevent such injustice or vicious because he permits it. O misera necessitas, cries St. Augustine, non posse non peccare—that is, the most terrible thing that can happen to us is that we are able to sin.2 And so we come to the paradoxical statement which cannot be avoided:

Lead us not into temptation (Matthew 6:13). The fact that we are being constantly tempted means that God permits it. Here the prayer is “do not let us go too far,” eis peirasmon— that is, on the way of being tested. Would God lead us into temptation? Why not, if we are here on earth to be tempted? He will allow Satan, our common enemy, to try man and to tempt him. This recognizes that being tested is part of God’s plan. He can let the test go as far as he wants to, as in the case of Abraham and Isaac, a subject of shock and abhorrence by the critics. Like Abraham, we are being tested as part of God’s plan; to know no temptation implies a static condition of life—but they shall be as the angels. Irenaeus, replying to the gnostics, says that the chance to take a test here on earth makes us “envied of the angels.”3 We may ask God to temper the test as he did with Cain after he complained, “My punishment is greater than I can bear” (Moses 5:38).

But deliver us from evil (Matthew 6:13). The word here for “deliver” means snatch, rescue, drag—the implication being that the test is no trivial one. St. Augustine does not see why God simply does not allow temptation by forbidding evil to exist. The common answer of conventional Christianity to the paradox of evil in a world created by God is that there is no evil really; it is only an illusion. Evil is evil precisely because it is not—it is purely negation, etc. But Joseph Smith in the grove learned better. To say “I am no devil” is Satan’s most effective ploy.

So Satan is allowed to tempt us but not to destroy us—as with Job, the order is “but spare his life.” The word is rhysai, to save in time, to snatch out of danger, and it shows that one is to be exposed to danger; there is no plea to forbid evil to exist or to prevent it from coming near us, but only not to let things go too far, to save us in time. Satan leads us into temptation, and if we yield to temptation, then we depend on a Savior to clear the way back to God’s presence after we have learned good and evil by experience.

For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen (Matthew 6:13). The instructions to Israel from the time of the exodus to the Dead Sea Scrolls is that when a prayer is offered all who hear it must cry Amen to show that it is their prayer too. Some have said that the doxology was added later to the Lord’s Prayer and is therefore an anachronism in the Book of Mormon. Joachim Jeremias has shown from ancient examples, Jewish and Christian, that in the oldest version of the Lord’s Prayer the doxology was bound to be included; the prayer would not be complete without it.4 It was naturally assumed that this would be added to any prayer. It is the eschatological statement: the delivering from evil is immediately followed by a return to the heavenly sphere in which the prayer began: “We will provide a Savior, deliverer, rescuer that they may again return to our presence,” which is indeed the kingdom and the power and the glory which is to last forever—the eternal life to come. The Lord’s Prayer follows a pattern familiar from ancient ceremonies and “mysteries” which follow a threefold order: (1) the archē, which is protology, the prologue in heaven, the preexistence; (2) the omphalos, the present center which is history, the part that concerns our present condition, the scene of the contest in which the issue is still in doubt, and (3) the sphragis or seal which is placed upon the final accomplishment; it is the consummation and ends in heaven. Without 1 and 3 you cannot understand number 2—the daily bread, debts and debtors, the evil situation in which they have placed us. The omphalos of the prayer is the cry de profundis, out of the depths, which all the Saints have uttered at one time or another. We need only think of Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Elijah, and the Lord himself.

The rest of the chapter is of great importance in explaining and expanding on the prayer. God is not just a model or example to follow in forgiving: only as far as we forgive others will he forgive us. If we don’t forgive them, he will not forgive us (Matthew 6:14–15). We show our true feelings toward God in the way we treat people. Later on he emphasizes the principle, unto “the least of these” (Matthew 25:40). The less important the person you help, the greater will be your blessing, for in helping such there is no ulterior motive or gain envisaged. It is interesting that the verse asking to be delivered from evil is immediately followed by a verse telling how we go about qualifying for such deliverance, “If ye forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.” Next, we are told not to be skythropos (dour, self-righteous). Make no effort to appear righteous; lean over backward not to, for your good deeds are a secret between you and God (Matthew 6:16–18). And we are told to avoid coveting, or brosis, which is any kind of decay or consumption, oxidation, the fate of all material things. In the next verse the treasures in heaven definitely refer to the preexistence (v. 20). You have treasures up there without realizing it. They are waiting for you. According to a rich apocryphal literature, they are being kept on hold from your former existence, and one of the great tragedies of sin in this world is that you lose so much after having already won it. The theme continues. You cannot mingle the two worlds: “where your treasure is, there will your heart be also” (v. 21); you cannot “serve two masters” (v. 24); the Lord really means it when he says “take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink” (v. 25), etc. He knows that this is a radical doctrine that has upset the disciples, but he continues to force it on them: Food? He takes care of the birds. Clothes? Consider the lilies of the field. The trouble is, he tells them, they don’t have any faith, they should give it a try (see v. 32). The people of the world everywhere see the economy as the big problem, but as the Lord often told Israel, Christ now tells the disciples, “You are not to be like them.”

The Lord’s Prayer is more than just a way of getting through life, a code of morals, or a pattern of behavior. It is an appeal to a Father we have known before and hope to dwell with hereafter. It asks for help in carrying out the first and greatest commandment. In this very short prayer, God, man as the child of God, and fellowman are all put in their proper relationship, which is the closest possible family association, approaching identity. The tempter and his methods are introduced, without which the statement of the gospel plan would be incomplete, for the prayer by its very nature is an appeal from those in distress who are supplicating for something much better than what they have. What we want is to dwell in the Father’s kingdom under the sole dominion of his divine will by his power and in his glory forever and ever. Jesus proceeds to explain the relationship to God of those to whom he imparts the prayer: The Father will deal with you exactly as you deal with other humans; he will even withhold his kindness from you if you withhold it from them. But as far as credit for what you do, you are making no deals with men; you are not out to impress them or make points with them (a theme strongly emphasized in the Gospel of Matthew). Any consideration of reward is wholly between you and your Heavenly Father; and any credit you are able to get from man, seeking it deliberately by various means, you will lose with God.

Notes

^1. Irenaeus, Contra Haereses (Against the Heresies) 1, proem.

^2. Augustine, On Correction and Grace 33.

^3. Irenaeus, Against the Heresies 4.37.3–6, in PG 7:1101–3.

^4. Joachim Jeremias, “The Lord’s Prayer in Modern Research,” Christian News from Israel 14 (April 1963): 10.

24

Turning the Time Over to . . . Priesthood

Originally a Sunday School lesson, this was published in Sunstone, December 1990, 10–11. A few minor changes have been made, including adding a footnote and correcting some of the citations.

[Sunstone] Editor’s Note: Several weeks ago, a friend gave us a copy of this piece, purportedly written by Hugh Nibley. When we read it, it had the feel of Nibley’s classic social commentaries but not the look; for one thing, Nibley doesn’t use multiple exclamation points. Obviously, ours was an uncorrected transcription from a clandestine recording. After a second person gave us a copy that was given to him by his BYU religion teacher, we contacted Brother Nibley. He corrected our copy and allowed us to publish an “authorized version” of what was originally part of a Sunday School lesson.

The priesthood ceases to be effective when exercised “in any degree of unrighteousness” (D&C 121:37), but it operates by the spirit, and the spirit is not deceived but is exquisitely sensitive to the slightest color of fraud, pretension, self-will, ambition, cruelty, etc. “When we undertake . . . to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man” (D&C 121:37). But what about the righteous dominion of the priesthood? That can be easily recognized, for it operates “only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; By kindness and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile,” with “bowels . . . full of charity towards all men” (121:41–42, 45). Even in the eternities the power of the priesthood flows “without compulsory means . . . forever and ever” (121:46).

Who can deny such a power to another? No man. Who can bestow it on another? No man. We like to think that the Church is divided into those who have it and those who don’t have it; but it is the purest folly to assume that we can tell who has it and who does not. God alone knows who is righteous and how righteous; yet “the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven,” and those “cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness” (D&C 121:36). The result is, that if there is anyone who really holds the priesthood, no one is in a position to say who it is—only by the power to command the spirits and the elements is such a gift apparent. But as far as commanding or directing other people, there every man must decide for himself.

One valuable hint the Lord has given us, however, namely the assurance that of all those who “hold” the priesthood almost none really possess it. “That the rights of the priesthood . . . may be conferred upon us, it is true,” making us formally priesthood holders, “but when we undertake . . . to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness” the priesthood is void (D&C 121:36–37). And this is how it is in “almost all” cases in the Church: “We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion. Hence many are called, but few are chosen” (D&C 121:39–40).

What does one have to do to be chosen?

First, one may not set one’s heart “upon the things of this world” (D&C 121:35)—so much for the priesthood as something to show off; then, one may not aspire to the honors of men—so much for the priesthood as something for prestige. One cannot exercise any power of the priesthood in any degree of unrighteousness—this in full recognition of the fact that “it is the nature . . . of almost all men” to do that very thing as soon as they think they have power and authority.

This leaves a few humble, unpretentious, and unworldly people as the sole holders of a valid priesthood. It is the few “humble followers of Christ” who are the strength of the Church throughout much of the Book of Mormon history (see 2 Nephi 28:14; Helaman 6:39).

What irony. As far as the whole world is concerned, the priesthood is a thing of value which is cruel to withhold from anyone, because it enhances one’s status and dignity among his fellows, whether inside the Church or outside. And yet the one thing that renders that priesthood completely null and void is to treat it as something to aspire to among one’s fellows. Priesthood is strictly an arrangement between the individual priesthood holder and his brethren in the eternal worlds, as personal and private as anything can be.

We might as well recognize the fact that whatever we say and do in righteousness is going to be misinterpreted. The only way we can make things easier for ourselves in the world is to go the way of the world. It would be hard to deny that the peace and prosperity of the Church in the past years has been largely the fruit of willingness to go the way the world goes.

Where all truth is encompassed in one great whole, to raise one question is to raise many others, and any issue relevant to the gospel inevitably leads to a discussion of the whole thing.

Is not the priesthood everything? Not on this earth. On this earth it is nothing, and as soon as we try to use it for any kind of status, power, rule, or authority, it automatically cancels out.

To repeat, as we are prone to do for lack of wit, for those who hold the priesthood on this earth, it is, Brigham Young said, an “onerous” burden, not a prize. One cannot give orders to another by the priesthood. One cannot use it to acquire prestige, fame, or wealth. Far from impressing one’s fellow men, it is held in derision by them. The moment one tries to make honor or glory, or exercise dominion by the priesthood, “amen to the priesthood . . . of that man”—it automatically becomes null and void. What good is it then? Over whom does it exercise dominion? Over the spirits and over the elements—but not over one’s fellow men, who cannot under any circumstances be deprived of their complete free agency.

Though some may find it hard to believe, I find no cause for boasting in my priesthood—nothing is easier than conferring it upon one, but that is only the beginning; for it to be a real power requires a degree of concentration, dedication, and self-discipline which few ever attain to, and for the rest priesthood is not a blessing but a terrible risk. The priesthood is not a badge of office to be worn as a feather in a cap.

Do we really believe the first vision? Thousands of Latter-day Saints attest to it every Fast Sunday; but when the earliest, fullest, and best account of the first vision, dictated by the Prophet at the age of 26 to Frederick G. Williams, was discovered and published in 1968 it caused not the slightest ripple of interest in the Church. It is enough, apparently, to know that God has spoken again from the heavens—never mind what he said.

The most useful lesson is the silence of heaven on this particular issue in the light of our own woeful ignorance. There is a connection between the two. Where the people do not seek for wisdom and knowledge, God will not give it to them, and so they remain in ignorance, and may not ask for help from above.

Nothing pleases God more than to have his children “seek greater light and knowledge”—it was for that that Adam, Abraham, Enoch, Moses, and Joseph Smith were rewarded with the richest blessings. Nothing displeases him more than to have them “seek for power, and authority, and riches” (3 Nephi 6:15). Through the years the Latter-day Saints have consistently sought not for the former but for the latter. It is only right and proper that we should stew in our own juice for a while.

“I sought for the blessings of the fathers, . . . desiring also to be one who possessed great knowledge, and to be a greater follower of righteousness, and to possess a greater knowledge” (Abraham 1:2).

Twice he repeats it—he wants knowledge. Up to the last, even after he had learned all the doctrines of salvation, Adam still “seeks for greater light and knowledge” and for such knowledge we should seek eternally. But what do we hear? A former president of the BYU pompously announced at a convention of educators that we at the BYU are not seeking for truth, because we have the truth! This is where we stand today. It is common at the BYU for students to protest against being taught anything they did not know before: “Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my word? . . . And because that I have spoken one word ye need not suppose that I cannot speak another; for my work is not yet finished; neither shall it be until the end of man” (2 Nephi 29:8–9).

The fact is that the Latter-day Saints “will not search knowledge, nor understand great knowledge, when it is given unto them in plainness, even as plain as word can be” (2 Nephi 32:7). They simply are just not interested. How little we know about things. How little we want to know. The information is there, far more abundant than we have been willing to realize, if we will only reach out for it. To wait for a revelation on the subject is foolish until we have exhausted all the resources already placed at our disposal.

The strong prejudice has long been extended to the Indians by many Mormons in high position, yet the Mormons alone of all the people in the world believe the Indians to be the true blood of Israel, no less.

Such attitudes are strengthened by the snobbery of American suburbia; the Mormons like to think of themselves as WASPS—yet it was the rural, white, Christian, Protestant Americans upon whom the Lord with his own lips excoriated to the youthful prophet; they are all hypocrites, said he: “They were all wrong . . . all their creeds were an abomination in his sight . . . those professors were all corrupt; that: ‘they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me . . . having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof’” (Joseph Smith—History 1:19).

There are those in the Church who would identify Zion with “Executive Meadows, the Exclusive Condominium for the Right People.”

Repeat of repeat: Over whom does it exercise power, then? Over the spirits and over the elements—never over one’s fellow men, whose free agency is absolute and inalienable.

Christ commanded the spirits, and they obeyed him; he commanded the elements and they obeyed him, but men he would not command, and he rebuked the apostles at Capernaum for suggesting it. “How often would I have gathered you together . . . but ye would not!” (D&C 43:24).

What, then is the priesthood on this earth? It is what Brigham Young and the Twelve wrote in the Times and Seasons in 1839; they called the priesthood an “onerous duty,” a load to be borne.1 Very few men on earth, including those in the Church are really qualified. In terms of prestige, status, power, influence, pleasure, privilege, “power, and authority, and riches” (3 Nephi 6:15), the priesthood has absolutely nothing to offer. The world laughs at it, the Latter-day Saints abuse or ignore it, those who take it seriously do so in “fear and trembling.”

Note

^1. Manuscript History of Brigham Young, 4 July 1839; “To the Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,” Times and Seasons 1/1 (1939): 13.

25

Tribute to Krešimir Ćosić

This was written on the occasion of Krešimir Ćosić’s death on 25 May 1995.

My first acquaintance with Krešimir Ćosić1 was when he came to my office with a question. As a brilliant and precocious basketball star, whose name—as our missionaries discovered—was almost a household word in some parts of Europe, he had been welcomed into the charmed circle of the jet set of the time and knew the delights of fashionable high living. But in considering his true condition, he said, he was greatly distressed—it all seemed so perfectly empty, of course. But what else was there? If that was the sort of thing that everybody wanted, why do we exist at all? Naturally, I quoted the scriptures to him: “Men are, that they might have joy” (2 Nephi 2:25). He did not know the word joy—his English was just beginning. “Radost,” I said, trying the Russian word. He responded with a smile of immense satisfaction—Joy was his element, not the dreary and laborious pleasures of sophisticated celebrities, but the spontaneous childlike happiness of sharing an eager awareness of each other. “This is my work and my glory,” said God, to share “immortality and eternal life” with absolutely everyone (Moses 1:39).

Shortly after, Krešimir asked me to do some work for him in the temple. To me, almost a stranger, his style of gentle persuasion seemed to come on a bit strong, and I was very sick at the time—I could not possibly go to the temple. But I went, and at the very first words of the initiatory work, I suddenly felt a giant’s strength and a great surge of joy. After the session I insisted on walking the two miles home alone in high spirits. Who was this man for whose work Krešimir was so irresistibly insistent? When I got to the house Krešimir was waiting and told me the story. It was a relative who had lived in a previous century, a powerful noble in the land and a leader among the people. It was a time of strife, hatred, and internecine power struggle among factions and communities that had long been wasting the land. What could ever check or halt the obsessive evil that endlessly fed on itself? The great man thought of an ingenious plan. In different parts of the country he built manors or hostels for each of his various sons (I think there were seven). In each of these a sort of open house was to be practiced, not only toward the general public, but for the sons to visit and enjoy each other’s company from time to time. According to Krešimir, this cultivating of the natural tendency of God’s children to like each other did indeed have an uplifting and pacifying effect in all the land.

This was my first association with Krešimir when he was as much of an enigma to me as to others. But I never again treated his urgings and suggestions lightly; there was a purpose to everything he did.

When Krešimir first came to the Brigham Young University, he mingled with a student element which was anything but prudish; nobody knew better than he the hankypanky that went on in the outer reaches of Well-to-do. One day he came to me and said, “There are a hundred reasons why I should not join the Church, and only one reason why I should—because it is true.” So he asked me to baptize him. He did not want to make a public relations gimmick of a sacred ordinance and had a very effective way of keeping it from spreading abroad: when asked if he had really been baptized, he would give you his usual merry smile and ask with a twinkle, “What do you think?” The things of this world he did not take too seriously. After losing a championship game to Colorado by the narrowest of margins, he came to the house, and Phyllis commiserated with him— “You must have felt very bad about it.” “Yes,” he said, “I did feel very bad about it—for twenty minutes!”

That was the source of his confidence and joy, an unfailing sense of values. He saw things in a different perspective from the rest of the world, and this explains his unshakable cheerfulness and sense of fun—he wanted to share the joke with you, the joke being that there is far more to existence than being a world-famous athlete. He was extraordinary enough to give one the feeling of being almost with an alien. And, indeed, newspaper writers and others found it most strange that a much-sought-after athletic talent should end up at a school most people had never heard of. His unpredictable career led him to situations of singular influence where no striving ambition could have taken him.

There is a natural ambiguity about administering to the sick—we don’t know everything, and what we want and ask for is not necessarily for the best; even faith to move mountains implies an equivalent amount of knowledge, which we do not have. So naturally we pray for what we want—what else? We are invited to express our wants and know where we stand. But who would be foolish enough to insist that the final decision be his own? Krešimir Ćosić has always been a step beyond or at least beside the normal run of men. His life was ever promising new trials and triumphs, but on a plane not common to mortals; this gives some of us the assurance that all is not over by any means.

His friend,

H. Nibley

Note

^1. Krešimir Ćosić died of cancer on 25 May 1995 at the age of 46 in Washington, DC. He was a popular basketball star at Brigham Young University in the early 1970s. He returned to Yugoslavia to be a player and coach of the national basketball team. He served as Croatia’s deputy ambassador and acting ambassador to the United States of America.

26

Graveside Service Address for Joel Erik Myres

In a week I shall have my ninety-first birthday. What do I have to look forward to after that? The answer—as much as I ever had. Are we going anywhere in this life? The other side is where the real work is being done: “There was a space granted unto man in which he might repent; therefore this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; a time to prepare for that endless state which has been spoken of by us, which is after the resurrection of the dead” (Alma 12:24).

The history of the race, like the life of the individual, has been a succession of tests. They come in dispensations. Joseph Smith in one book has given us comprehensive accounts of seven great dispensations of the gospel. It was an exercise unmatched in “extreme scholarship,” yet we have ample means of controlling his account because of the rich apocryphal sources now known to the world. Each dispensation, which is a bestowal or handing down of the gospel by direct revelation, was immediately followed by general apostasy and wickedness.

Joel Erik Myres was married to a granddaughter of Hugh Nibley, Natalie Mincek. Myres passed away on 7 March 2001; this address was read at the graveside service held on 20 March 2001.

Adam and Eve “mourned before the Lord” (Moses 5:27), while their own offspring “loved Satan more than God” (Moses 5:18, 28). Enoch wept and “refuse[d] to be comforted” (Moses 7:44); he left the world with his righteous Zion to consign “the residue of the people” (Moses 7:20) to destruction. The flood had barely dried up when the people of Noah’s day were back to their old ways, “And the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man’s sake; for the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth” (Genesis 8:21). Abraham’s own parents turned from the gospel to the practice of idolatry and human sacrifice (Abraham 1:5–7), while his people went directly into four hundred years of bondage in Egypt, which they deserved. Hear Moses’ farewell address: “Behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the Lord; and how much more after my death?” (Deuteronomy 31:27).

Christ in his prophecies to the apostles predicted the destruction of Jerusalem and the scattering of the Jews as but “the beginning of sorrows” (Matthew 24:8)—two thousand years of them: “For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be” (Matthew 24:21). And finally, Joseph Smith was shown a vision of the last days so terrible that he begged the Lord to take it away.

As far back as the record goes, people have been edified by great temple dramas depicting the creation, the council in heaven, Satan’s claim to complete control of the operation, and his expulsion from heaven. Joseph Smith has given us in the Book of Moses two such temple dramas, one starring Moses and the other Enoch.

The editors of the classical and Egyptian versions have been reminding us recently that the plays answer three main questions in their attempt to give majesty and purpose to the suffering of man. (1) Why is this world such a mean place? As Hamlet puts it, “Weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,” “an unweeded garden that grows to seed”—“things rank and gross in nature possess it merely.”1 There was a saying in the German villages where I spent my mission, “Das Leben ist wie ein Kinderhemd, kurz und besuldelt” (Life is like a baby’s bib, short and messy). (2) Where is God when we need him? This had a special name with the ancients, aporia, “absence in emergency,” “unable to make it,” “out to lunch.” Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail cries out, “O God, . . . where is . . . thy hiding place?” (D&C 121:1). And the Lord in Gethsemane pleads for relief, but knows he must go on to Golgotha. (3) Why, with our vast potential and talents, is our life so ridiculously short? Even genius takes time to develop. This is Omar Khayyám’s complaint: “One moment in annihilation’s waste, One moment of the well of life to taste— the stars are setting and the caravan starts for the dawn of nothing—O, make haste!”2 If you are being severely tested, why not be given a decent chance to show what you can really do?

These questions answer themselves. Don’t tell me there is no answer—if there was no answer there would be no question. But the answers are very clear, especially in Joel’s case. Almost everything that happens to us in this life presents us with a sort of test, from crossing the street to reaching the moon; getting up in the morning and going to bed at night, the slightest exertion challenging inertia (Newton’s First Law). Even more than our actions, our very thoughts are an unceasing test. Experts on the brain tell us that, unlike God, we can think of only one thing at a time; every individual must decide for himself at every moment just what he is going to think about.

So we are being tested here, and there is no escape from it. To recapitulate, Karl Popper has explained that to test anything, whether a piece of machinery, building materials, a student’s knowledge, or a weightlifter’s strength, it must be tried to the limit. Anything that stops short of that limit leaves the question in doubt. We need only think of Gethsemane. So don’t expect an easy test. As to aporia, God stands on the sidelines and does not interfere. Again we think of Gethsemane; angels brought comfort but no escape from the cross.

The severest test ever given to a human was Abraham’s, the sacrifice of his only son. And after the trial was over, he named the place Jehovah-jireh (Genesis 22:14), which means that God was watching all the time and knew exactly how it would turn out. Abraham may have known too because he told the men watching the pack animals that he and Isaac would be back in a little while. But Isaac did not know. For him it was the Akedah—Gethsemane. But Abraham, like all who would become children of Abraham, was tested right up to the point where the angel cried, “Lay not thine hand upon the lad, . . . for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me” (Genesis 22:12).

And why is the time so short? It takes years to acquire the knowledge, wisdom, skill, understanding, and experience necessary to achieve our maximum in this world. So after years of preparation one comes primed and ready to take the examination. A four-hour test would be a joyful opportunity—a chance to show off. But what happens? After five minutes the monitor says, “Time’s up, drop your pens and hand in your papers.” That is what happened to Joel. He worked like a demon and was prepared to write a ten-hour examination at least. But what happens? As I lie in bed I look at a solid wall of books by my side, chosen over a lifetime with the greatest care—they put me into the picture of the ancient world as efficiently and pleasantly as anything else could—and yet I have to turn over, fall asleep, and dismiss them with a sigh—I have them at last, but no time left to read them.

Isn’t the explanation to all three questions obvious?

(1) The routine presented by a vicious and contrary world?

(2) The absence of any ready assistance?

(3) The grossly disappointing examination that nobody is going to read? And at the end? What are we being tested for if not for achievement or ability? What then is all this testing about? The answer is that all this is simply to show what kind of people we are. Obviously we are being groomed for an immensely important assignment and for a vast expanse of time, and possibly for vicious and insidious opposition.

Have we the qualities to stand up to it? Because the next step we take will be for eternity. The covenants we make explain it. For what specifically are we being tested? What are the qualities and talents we will need for an eternal task of dealing with the highest and the lowest forms of existence? They are characteristics well-known to all of us. (1) First of all, in being willing to take the test, we show obedience, trusting our welfare to the wisdom of others. (2) And since this is going to require substantial yielding of our own sacro egoismo, that means sacrifice. (3) We are not alone and never will be, so we may never forget the rights and blessings of others which we share with them; the family is the model and sets the tone that prescribes our behavior; we are dealing always with others as dear to us as our own existence, so there can be no clashing of wills and temperaments. Such is the law of the gospel.

(4) Naturally, the wanton and excessive excitement characteristic of Roman society, and our own, has no place in a world where all things are sacred. We accept the law of chastity. (5) The whole thing is summed up in life in the world of the living—we all have the same feelings of justice and righteousness, devoid of legal quibbling or sophistry— in other words, perfectly spontaneous love for everything that is “good, true, and beautiful.” It is for all of us to give and to receive. That is the law of consecration.

Joseph Smith, the founder of this last dispensation, was the only mortal aware of just what is going on. He regretted the impossibility of communicating all he had seen. The question remains—Is this all there is? Here I am free to speak. From reasons based on the evidence of things around us and above us, I believe that Joel is joyfully employed at present. My reasoning is not perfect, but I can support it with a number of personal experiences that leave me in absolutely no doubt at all that Joel is engaged in a higher work. I expect to have this assertion confirmed in my own case before very long.

That we may comprehend the wisdom and love in God’s dealings with all of us is my prayer in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Notes

^1. William Shakespeare, Hamlet, act 1, scene 2, lines 133–38.

^2. Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám, 38, trans. Edward Fitzgerald (New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1946).

Part 6

Temples

27

The Greatness of Egypt

This address was delivered on 12 March 1986 as part of the Ramses II International Lecture Series.

As to the subject of my talk today, I have chosen the safest title. What fifth-grade child after his class has visited the Ramses exhibit would be at a loss to produce a juvenile composition on “The Greatness of Egypt”? In fact, all over the valley these days school children, including my own grandchildren, are busily composing reports and preparing projects on that exotic culture. I hope to show before I’m through that the title is not as naive as it sounds—though I often wish we would declare a moratorium on that overworked word, great. Not being an Egyptologist, I welcomed this assignment as an inducement and an excuse for reviewing some twenty-five years of looking at inscriptions and papyri on my own, made possible by the blessing of Xerox and now expedited by my own aging notes and cribbings—and all that to decide whether I have learned anything or not.

Most Egyptologists have told us wherein they think the greatness of Egypt lies, though on some points they disagreed. Like the priest Chryses in the Iliad, I shall need some defense here, for I fear that what I shall say may offend the great ones.

But on some points all will concede the greatness of Egypt. First of all, there is the sheer mass and charge of the ruins, the overall grandeur of the show, as undeniable as the Grand Canyon. In my first year in high school I learned from James H. Breasted’s Ancient History that eighty-five men could stand atop one of the great pillars of the Hypostyle Hall at Karnak, and though I would not urge that many to try it, no further demonstration was needed to fix for all time in juvenile minds the noble dimensions of that civilization. But no less impressive than the bulk of the monuments was their age. If size times age is the equation of greatness, then the pyramids are in a class by themselves, looming vast and distant, the manifest reality of another world. But “That’s not it,” as Cleopatra says; size and age are relative things—the mountains just behind us are far bigger and older than man-made monuments. What is most important, after all, is style—the Egyptians had class, and they had it like no other people. (Don’t panic—we’ll get to the Greeks!) “There is something in every Egyptian work of art,” wrote Heinrich Schäfer, “that links it to every other Egyptian work of art, and distinguishes it from every non-Egyptian work of art.”1 “Why is it,” asks another eminent Egyptologist, “that a traveler will believe things in Egypt that he will not believe outside of Egypt?” And he answers: “It is because a singular and awesome sense of the eternal goes over the whole land.”2 The unmistakable and inimitable Egyptian style, writes another, is “characterized by a harmony between grace and majesty. . . . The permanency of this style is the most striking feature of the ancient Egyptian culture. This proves that the ancient Egyptian culture was animated by great inner strength. It was entirely homogeneous,”3 or at least, we would add, original and unique, as is also the matchless written heritage. “For vividness of expression and richness in human touches,” Alan H. Gardiner observed, “the Egyptian records vastly excel their counterparts from other ancient Oriental lands.”4 Some visitors to such exhibits as the Ramses II see the characteristic stamp of the culture in its funereal orientation; don’t blame the Egyptians for that, for as Gardiner assures us, “nine-tenths of all Egyptian excavations have been conducted on the high desert. . . . To this circumstance is due the overwhelming funerary character of most of the finds.”5 If you do all your digging in a cemetery you will find sundry products of the mortuary industry, but don’t complain that the people who put them there never thought of anything else.

There is plenty of evidence that the ancients felt the same awe and wonder before the Egyptian phenomenon that we do. Its grandeur, its stability, and its mystery are not imagined qualities. The ruins speak for themselves, but the Egyptians deserve special attention because they have gone out of their way to tell us about themselves. They have staked out their claim to primacy by leaving written clues on all sorts of things, strewn all along the trail from the beginning, often with urgent invitations to read and respond, to know who they were and what they did, and to profit by their experience. Many autobiographies (a convenient collection in Kurt Sethe’s Urkunden) give instructions on how to live—the seboyet (sbȝ.yt) of the schools, a Wisdom literature that is both frank and ethical, instructions of kings to their ministers and fathers to sons, funerary texts setting forth the qualifications for a happy hereafter, temple texts specifying the steps by which eternity is achieved, hymns of praise and contemplative as well as skeptical compositions, and romantic and exciting tales which on closer study reveal a deeper import than first meets the eye—all invite us to intimate acquaintance with these people. Even the cryptography is a challenge to the passerby to use his wits and satisfy his curiosity. By these we can take measure of the Egyptian character. Moreover, the evidence of their words is supported by that of their works—their monuments and sacred structures, their revealing portraits and domestic scenes of life at court or in the home, even the doings in the workshop and in the field projected in lifelike drawings and figurines, put us into the pictures.

From all of these the observer receives a strong impression of the unique and unmistakable Egyptian character. From the first they liked to attribute it to the landscape, in which, as Hermann Kees puts it, “everything emphasizes the constant and unchanging,” imparting a sense of “calm and regularity which unavoidably affected the character of the people.”6 The constancy and permanence of things is noted by everyone. “The motifs which already prevailed in the Old Kingdom, are still to be found in the texts and in the representations of the temples of the Ptolemaic period. This is positive proof that the typically Egyptian ideas remained constant.”7 The work of Walter B. Emery shows how everything appears suddenly full-blown about 3400 and stays that way. Thus the Book of the Dead quotes texts from the First Dynasty, and a splendid portrait bronze of the Thirty-first Dynasty shows us a man who sat for the artist two thousand years before.8 Portraits from the Twenty-fifth and Twenty-sixth Dynasties are easily mistaken for works of the Fourth or Fifth,9 just as the funeral text of those late periods could have come right out of the Pyramid Texts. “The Egyptians escape death by arresting time,” is Siegfried Morenz’s conclusion, and he cites Wolf: “No Egyptian picture indicates any time of day; . . . everything simply is, nothing is becoming, everywhere we see rigid, timeless existence.”10

How then does one account for the ubiquitous appearance of the familiar kheper-scarab (ḫpr) who stands for transformation, the very symbol of change? “The Egyptian lives in a world of ceaseless ‘transformations’ (kheperou),” writes Max Guilmot.11 Change cannot be denied: it may seem like a great paradox or mystery to be constantly changing yet always remaining the same, yet the fact is that we see it all around us every day; the most obvious and undeniable fact of life is that each man in his time plays many parts, while all the time remaining himself. This coincidence of opposites is one of the most conspicuous concerns of the Egyptians: temples and tombs are not dead ends but places of passage in which one moves ever from chamber to chamber and from level to level—and then on to the beyond.12 This meant that the Egyptian could accept the reality of time and its ravages without being terrified by it—time moves us out of one condition only to promote us to another; no need for “lives of quiet desperation.” “One might ask,” writes John A. Wilson, “how a rigid and static order could possibly stand the wear and tear of change over so many centuries. . . . A tolerant and easygoing people could not be categorically absolute. . . . In art, for example, . . . there was always variety and individuality,” while “the dogma was of general nature, and the actual practice was flexible, tolerant, catholic, and pragmatic.”13 The Egyptian could afford the luxury of relaxing and enjoying a life that counted on a happy ending.

Every Egyptologist has commented on the ready acceptance of contradictions as the special mark of Egyptian thinking. In the cults and doctrines, Adolf Erman notes, “competition and conflict bothered no one,” yet in thought and action the practitioners were “calm and rational.”14 The prominent feature of Egyptian religion is that mythological concepts are very often contradictory, notes Rudolf Anthes, and explains: the Christian says, “It is so and therefore cannot be otherwise,” while the Egyptian says, “We can understand it so and also otherwise,”15 much in the manner of modern quantum physics. This is reflected in the dualism which is so conspicuous in the royal appointments of Egypt—two kingdoms, two thrones, two palaces, two tombs, two lands, etc., are existing at all times side by side, one never putting the other down in total victory. The earliest documents of all, the famous Predynastic palettes, as Siegfried Schott studied them, “show an attempt of speculative wisdom to explain this world as an interplay of Joy and Strife,” a sort of “allegory on the way of the world.”16 The famous Shabako text, one of the oldest religious writings, tells us that this life is a time of probation in which all must make their choice between good and evil ways to determine what their hereafter shall be: the world is necessarily a place of opposites, as a scene of testing and choosing.17

Perhaps the most remarkable aspect of apparent contradiction is a society of individualists whose ideal is that of absolute monarchy. The Pharaoh is all-in-all, but that leaves everybody else free and equal. An unbridgeable gulf between divinity and mortality? As is well known, “funerary customs . . . were originally reserved for the king,” but right at the outset they “spread to members of the royal house,” and then on down “until finally every Egyptian secured the right of identifying himself in death with Osiris, the royal god of the dead.”18 In this open society “artisans would be recruited from the peasants; . . . superior artisans . . . would thus move into the aristocracy.”19 In the best period, according to Wilson, “the democratic theory . . . knew no class lines but extended down to the lowest peasant,” on the principle enunciated by the wise man Amenemope: God has made all men an equal in opportunity.20 The king is the Good Shepherd, and the purpose of his kingship and priesthood is to serve all the others. Thus in the Fifth Dynasty tomb of Ti we see “a kind herdsman has lifted onto his shoulder a frightened calf that is looking round for its mother. The other herdsman seems to be quieting another animal. . . . This pastoral mood” expresses the religious doctrine of “the sun-god, as a good shepherd [who] takes care of mankind . . . and as the Great Preserver, makes the plants and beasts flourish.”21 It was this concern of all for all that boded well for the survival of the culture, that “sense of responsibility towards nature,” as Philippe Derchain puts it, which forbade the Egyptian to destroy life in any form or to hold it in contempt.22 Pharaoh felt responsible for all his possessions and did not deal with them wantonly or wastefully;23 it was his concern, expressed in the royal tomb of Ramses IV, not to harm any living creature.24 And it is the frequent boast of individual autobiographies that the subject has never harmed any living thing. On the other hand, the official representative of all that is immoral to the Egyptian mind is Seth, the archetypal villain, brutal, mindless, acquisitive, the bully boy who destroys gardens and groves in his wanton campaigns of conquest. Unable to create or to beget offspring, he is obsessed only with the quest for power and gain.25 Of what does the Egyptian boast in his epitaph? That he helped the weak and was kind to the stranger, that he sustained the people of his town when times were bad, that everyone loved him, that he never showed partiality to the rich and powerful or to his personal friends, and that he was honored by his father, loved by his mother, adored by his brothers and sisters, and blessed by all the household and all the citizens of the community. Naturally the German professors promptly labeled this glatter Phrasenschwulst, hypocritical rhetoric.26 But the important thing is that it holds up to us the ideal man of the Egyptians, how a man wanted to be and be thought of, the qualities which society in every period praised and valued. The only kind of management that we can imagine as capable of getting the pyramids built was that “sneer of cold command” which the poet tagged on the Egyptians when very little was known about them.27 Monuments like the tombs of el-Bersheh and Petosiris tell us how the great works were done in a very different spirit; the markings on pyramid stones put there in happy competition by the work gangs—the Go-getters, the Scepter Gang, the Tough Gang, the North Gang, etc.—names expressing the lively sense of pride, piety, and fun that animated everybody engaged in the operation.28

The Greeks often praised the Egyptian wise men as the most holy, righteous, healthy, long-lived, and learned, and the people as the happiest, most sober, and most moral people on earth.29 They had their values right: “It is a good thing,” said the wise Merikare, “to work for the future and live an active life. . . . But life on earth passes; it is not very long. . . . So don’t seek after property; the possessions of a million men are nothing to the Lord of the Two Lands. A good man shall live forever.”30 When things go wrong they know the reason; a king wrote down in person the dictation of the prophet Neferrohu, who sounds exactly like the prophets of Israel: “Behold the great one is fallen. . . . Perished is this land. . . . Every man’s heart careth only for his own self. I will show thee the son as an enemy, the brother as a foe, a man slaying his father,” the blight of a “me” generation.31

As Erman notes, the Egyptians had no bloodthirsty gods, no ecstatic or orgiastic rites, “the ordinances were carried out in a calm and rational manner, and god was treated exactly like an exalted man.”32 If a peasant who had been robbed by a rascally estate manager could appeal clear up to the king, “the king himself is bound by obligations of loyalty,” as a recently found document describes it, mere office does not endow the holder with sanctity as in modern society, but even “an incompetent king was considered to be unworthy and ailing.”33 Pharaoh was the top of the pyramid, Wilson notes in a useful insight, “the only point of contact with the gods.”34 But where does the top, the pyramidion, end and the pyramid begin? They are all one, every level indispensable to the next to make the solidest of structures and to take us all up to heaven along the same celestial ramp and broadening sunbeam.

The stability and endurance of a culture used to be ascribed to the peculiar geography of Egypt, compared to a tube with only a narrow opening at either end, keeping the people in splendid isolation. But if Egypt was a tube, it was one that exerted powerful suction at either end as well as in the middle, for there was corn in Egypt. It was a mixture of all sorts of races,35 conquered by Libyan, Hyksos, Nubian, Persian, Greek, and Roman. But each conqueror at once aspired to become the true and legitimate Pharaoh with all the mystique and the trappings; if Graeca Capta educated its Roman captors, the throne of Pharaoh, like the legendary throne of Solomon, miraculously transformed almost every conqueror who sat on it, including the Greeks, into a zealous convert to the faith of Amon.

If one word sums up the Egyptian nobility of character, it is humanity. It is a peculiarity of the language, Hermann Grapow found, to speak of others in warm and intricate terms as parts of one’s body, while on the other hand no matter how angry an Egyptian was with another, he never likened a fellow human to any animal, as we so often do.36 Hundreds of pictures from every period show people as they wanted to be, as equals. There is the family group with no one member overshadowing another. A typical portrait of the Sixth Dynasty shows the midget Seneb sitting with great dignity on a stand which puts him on the level with his wife. The little man was no less than the director of the important royal weaving works and a priest of the dead for the great King Cheops, while “his wife was a member of the royal house. He was not shamed to have his physical peculiarities portrayed.”37 Along with this equality an invincible individualism is seen all over in the tomb paintings, where the artist insists on doing his own thing, “actuated by a perverse and antic impulse,” and yet satisfied with being himself, never clamoring for public recognition. Wilson finds it a “paradox—to the modern—that he was a creative individual and yet was content to remain essentially anonymous; . . . he found his reward through serving his society faithfully.”38 It is paradoxical to our minds that anyone should create anything without a thought of fame and fortune. Everywhere in the pictures and inscriptions we find people hard-working, conscientious, eager to please those below their station as well as those above—one Pharaoh instructs an official not to bow down to any executive above his own rank! He knows the difficulty when middle management takes over. Optimistic, kind and tolerant, content with optimum conditions—why should they change? On the face of it such people have a better chance than the rest of us of weathering the slings and arrows that afflict nations as well as individuals.

The Doctors Disapprove

But there was one fatal flaw in the Egyptian culture that has denied it the recognition of the learned as a major contributor to Western civilization. Our representative scholar here shall be Erman, often hailed as the father of modern Egyptology, and especially helpful for his invaluable autobiography. Erman hails the work of Georg Ebers as having rid the world once and for all of the notion that the Egyptians “were a peculiar people, . . . unchanged through thousands of years, . . . a race of pious worshippers who were interested only in temples and tombs.”39 Yet strike out the “only” and that is what they were. It was the insistence of the Egyptians on injecting into the wisdom of the East allusions to cult and retribution hereafter based on the idea of the immortality of man that vitiated the purity of the proper philosophy and ethics that came to them from the Semitic world, according to Raymond Weill.40 Erman opens his classic work on Egyptian religion with an apology: “One cannot ask anyone to have any real enthusiasm for this barbarism, this age-old accumulation of absurdities.”41 The myths were bad enough, but the attempts of the priests to build a theology or philosophy on them was for Erman simply an abomination— a horror (“uns ein Greuel”).42 Gardiner found the writings “intolerably arid,” “unmitigated rubbish.”43 The best he can say for Egyptian religion is that it is as “alluring as a will o’-the-wisp by reason of its mystery and even in spite of its absurdity.”44 While noting the general tendency to take “an unsympathetic and even patronizing attitude toward the myths and religious practices of Pharaonic times,” he warns emphatically against taking the stuff seriously: “Perhaps even more dangerous is a standpoint” according to which priestly writings, such as the Hymn to Sobek, were regarded with respectful awe “just because the Old Egyptians were undeniably a highly gifted and truly civilized people.”45 After a brief flash of true intelligence, in which at least one Egyptian recognized that “phenomena were purely physical and not a product of divine or demoniacal forces,”46 the nation lapsed into religion and “groped for what they knew had been treasure, but groped in vain,” and so they “never achieved profundity,”47 and we have “the terrifying emptiness of Herodotus’s picture of the Egyptian as the most ‘god-fearing’ of peoples,” “utterly empty of mind or heart (and so) . . . exposed to the invasion of other-worldliness, monasticism or apocalyptic expectation.”48 Religion is the villain. The ancient Sophists put the same brand of superstition on the Egyptians, and Plutarch and Iamblichus in reply both ask them the same question that Santillana does today—“how the devil the pyramids happened to get built in spite of the strange frame of mind their constructors were cursed with.”49

Whence this prejudice against Egyptian religion? In the eighteenth century it had been accepted practice to explain “the mythologies, the sacred writings, and the monuments . . . by a reference to the Bible.”50 Then when Samuel Birch translated the Book of the Dead in 1867, it was hailed as “the Bible of the Egyptians,” but the inadequacy of the title was soon apparent. When in 1880 the far older Pyramid Texts were discovered, the experts, with a sigh of relief, pushed the Book of the Dead aside, all the more eager to demote it because it had exercised an irresistible attraction to occultists, professional mystics, and crackpots who muddied the waters in which they waded and brought discredit on more disciplined study.51 The great Erman tells of a professor at Berlin who actually believed that some things in the Bible were confirmed by archaeological finds in Egypt and Babylonia: “Never before or since,” he declared, “have I ever found such a strange phenomenon among educated people.”52 The Bible was out, and as in other fields, its place was taken by the eagerly welcomed doctrine of evolution. It all began with the fantasy of simple people, the workings of the natural surroundings on the primitive mind. The explanation was inevitable: Egypt went through the same evolution that every religion of a noteworthy people passes through.53 At the turn of the century Peter L. Renouf announced that “the myths of Egypt, like those of all other nations, arose (it cannot too often be repeated) from the spontaneous and often homely utterances of men in presence of nature.”54 “That Egyptian mythology, like the Indo-European, is derived from natural phenomena, and that its principal deities are names of the Sun, has, I suppose, never been doubted by modern scholars.”55 Greek science could learn nothing from the sources on Egypt simply because the Orientals were all “primitive” and “unsystematic,” and that goes even for the Babylonian cosmology, which was nothing but the “purest mythology . . . devoid of any abstract speculation.”56 Professor Otto Neugebauer would smile at that today.

The recondite nature of Egyptology made it possible for the schools to enjoy an absolute authority, for Egyptologists all too easily overrate their own learning and practice all manner of dilettantism while demanding unquestioning acceptance by the public. Erman tells us how he and the great Richard Lepsius used to laugh together at the naiveté of Gaston Maspero, which showed “how easily one can become ‘celebrated’ in this field” since the public knows nothing about it.57 And then he goes right on to tell the gentle reader what an inadequate teacher Lepsius himself was with his limited knowledge and his formal and aloof air of professorial importance.58 He goes right down the list, cutting the great ones down to size: “No one is so irresponsible (leichtherzig) and so clumsy in judging antiquities as the men of science and the technical experts,” he wrote— but what could the public know about that?59 Erman dismisses Heinrich K. Brugsch as unscrupulous, frivolous, and poorly educated; Edouard Naville as unpardonably imaginative, his thinking warped by “a childish hatred against l’école de Berlin [the school of Berlin]”;60 Ebers as a popularizer who knew nothing about Egyptian syntax; and W. M. Flinders Petrie as one who was uncritical and did not know the language, etc.61 As to Erman himself, “Not a single hour passed in which I did not preach the ars nesciendi, ‘I don’t understand it,’ and ‘God only knows what the Egyptians were thinking of there,’ were my daily confessions.”62 The sorest point of all was Egyptian religion on which Erman produced the definitive textbook: “Religion is the Schmerzkind of Egyptology. For half a century I have wrestled with it, and how little certainty has come of it after all. Everyone still invents his own Egyptian religion.”63 Here he lists the main theories, each with some merit, none decisive, with the conclusion: “One might say, however we figure it, we figure wrong; the problem is simply insoluble.” “I have never been able to escape that verdict.”64 Then why bother with it?

Erman’s pupil Breasted brought the Berlin franchise to Chicago (as Gardiner did to Oxford), where, as William F. Albright tells it, he “chafed against the exclusion” of his field from the “charmed circle” of the sciences, to which he finally gained admission by demonstrating how the Pyramid and Coffin Texts make it possible to recognize the organic evolution of Egyptian thought.65

This was that “evolutionary bias,” which, as Henri Frankfort notes, colors Egyptology through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries,66 and it was simplistic: man’s destiny is to improve steadily and irresistibly; man “has raised himself by his own bootstraps.” This philosophical naturalism Breasted called “the new humanism,”67 in which, Albright notes, Egyptologists shared with anthropologists and social scientists a “common dislike for Christianity and history.”68 It was as exact scientists that the positivists of Berlin would come before the world; they would have no truck with speculation. The exciting Berlin of the 1920s simply appalled Erman by its willingness to explore and speculate; the statement that “such and such a thing might be possible,” which rendered the new physics so exciting with its sense of uncertainties and possibilities, was for Erman utterly counterproductive, the very antithesis of science, which deals with absolute fact and nothing else.69 Such freedom of thought threatened to bring back “everything that we thought we had long since overcome and forgotten,” including such borderline disciplines as “Naturphilosophie and Mystik, and, I am ashamed to say, even the occult.” A feeling of physical nausea came over him, he says, when he was invited to lecture on graphology.70 As late as 1950 Weill insists that all speculations about the pyramids “should be killed by silence. They were built simply, soberly, and sanely; the science of their construction nous la connaissons positivment [we know without any doubt].”71 As Alfred Whitehead saw it, the scientific world was “suffering from a bad attack of muddle-headed positivism,” which taught “that there is the routine described in physical and chemical formulae, and that in the process of nature there is nothing else.”72 More significant for our theme, Erman eschewed the expansive and rewarding comparative methods of a Mommsen, Diels, and Harnack for rigid confinement to “hard work in my own speciality, the one thing I could do and wanted to do.”73

Breasted’s pupil and successor at Chicago was John A. Wilson. “We must have confidence,” Wilson wrote, “that historians have done their honest and painstaking best in collecting the data reverently, sorting them conscientiously, . . . that the historians are learned and sound in method and attitude. . . . We need the assurance only that the historian has tried to encompass all the details possible.”74 If this sounds like a speech from a comedy by Molière or a solo from Gilbert and Sullivan, we are not entitled to laugh, for the right to an opinion can be held, Professor Wilson assures us, “only by a professional archeologist who carries a union card indorsed by a majority of his peers. . . . We archeologists are a small, jealously guarded group with a tendency to inbreed.”75 I emphasize the strong antireligious bias of the Berlin school because through the years it has enjoyed the exclusive right of judging Joseph Smith and the Book of Abraham. The world has got exactly the verdict it wanted regarding that purported autobiography of the patriarch from a jury convinced beforehand that the author never existed.

How does one presume to understand a religion totally alien to one’s own thinking? Erman tells us that from early childhood, religion and the Bible meant absolutely nothing to him.76 A deaf man with the help of a good library could conceivably compose a standard history of music; and a blind man by having the books read to him could publish a learned history of art; in the same way scholars who believe nothing can and do spend their days turning out learned articles on religion, though the very essence of religion is faith. How do they justify themselves? Very simply, they admonish us to think like Egyptians or think like primitives. The observer is always superior to the observed, and the great thinker should by the easiest of declensions fathom the lesser minds of those beneath him. Erman assures us that since Egyptian religion has little relationship to rational thought, what one must do is to feel like and act like an Egyptian.77 Anthropologists and Egyptologists, who were once children themselves, find it very easy to descend into the childish mental level of the people they study. Some deny altogether to the Egyptians the capacity for rational thought; Louis Speleers insists that their brains are diseased. “This literature was created for and by brains that do not function as ours do. . . . It is as if the [Aristotelian] principle of contradiction: idem non potest simul esse et non esse, did not exist for them,”78 for whom “everything is as impoverished and material and concrete as the Christian metaphysics is abstract and spiritual.”79 Günther Roeder, who collected and translated all of the major religious texts exonerates even the Babylonians, Hindus, and Chinese from straying as far from reality as did the Egyptians.80 The doctrine of a thought-world incommensurate with our own was dignified in the 1930s and 1940s by the theory of a mythopoeic (or, for that matter, prelogical or magical) mode of thinking, which Eberhard Otto now assures us must be abandoned.81

The Changing Scene

Being so well dug in, the schoolmen are characteristically resistant to change, and many of them have lamented that so little progress has been made through the years in a science so richly endowed with means and materials. Erman recalls how when he generously supplied Eduard Meyer with new and relevant materials to their studies, “I was surprised that he was not in the least bit interested by it as I thought he would be. I have often thought of this when I have received new material after finishing a study.”82 It is, to say the least, annoying to have to tear up and realign our carefully laid plumbing when something new turns up, and scientists and all scholars, however they may claim that the search for truth at all costs is their only delight, do not always welcome change gladly. There was, for example, a definite loss of ground after World War I, Klaus Koch observes, when the broad comparative Oriental researches of former years were relinquished in favor of narrowly specialized and hence easier studies; and it was only a flood of archaeological and manuscript discoveries that got things moving again.83

The redoing of old texts, which makes up a large part of Egyptology, is bound to give second thoughts to successive generations, and since the midcentury there has been a growing tendency to self-doubt and dissension, as Kees, Bonnet, Morenz, Frankfort, Thausing, Zandee, and others found different answers to the question “What is the real essence and content of the Egyptian religion?”84 And while some have held that “the moment has not yet come to attempt the interpretation of Egyptian religion in depth; we are still gathering facts”; others, such as “A. M. Blackman,

J. H. Breasted, A. Moret, and to a certain extent K. Sethe,” were convinced that at least the main ideas could be discerned among the confusion of the documents,85 Erman having insisted that it is possible in spite of the tangled evidence to identify the Durchschnittsglauben or common faith of the Egyptians.86 Professor I. E. S. Edwards wrote in his famous book that “any attempt to reconstruct the historical and religious background of the Pyramids is fraught with hazards” and compares this problem to a jigsaw puzzle: “How often it occurs that some unexpected term in the pattern results in the necessity for a readjustment in the solver’s preconceived idea of the relationship between the various units!”87 In 1934 T. E. Peet confessed: “One is often asked this very simple question: Is it possible to read a piece of Egyptian as easily, as quickly, and as certainly as a piece of Greek or Latin? The answer to this must certainly be No. . . . Texts often present continuous difficulties with which those of a Platonic dialogue or even an Aeschylean chorus are hardly to be compared.”88 As Roeder sees it, the science got off on the wrong foot since “the earliest Egyptologists were in phonetic matters on the wrong trail, and so from the beginning have rendered the foundations of our science more or less flawed (etwas kraenklich).”89 “It must never be forgotten,” wrote Gardiner, “that we are dealing with a civilization thousands of years old and one of which only tiny remnants have survived. What is proudly advertised as Egyptian history is merely a collection of rags and tatters.”90 In the important Amduat texts, Derchain now finds it “almost impossible to understand what the Egyptians were trying to convey,”91 and of the important chapter 78 of the Book of the Dead, Adriaan de Buck wrote: “It is difficult to suppress a feeling of scepticism as to the intelligibility of the [Book of the Dead] version, not so much of its separate sentences, which as a rule are not difficult to translate, but above all things of the plot and story of the spell as a whole.”92 As to reading the Pyramid Texts, Raymond Faulkner quotes Gardiner: “The only basis we have for preferring one rendering to another, when once the exigencies of grammar and dictionary have been satisfied—and these leave a large margin for divergencies—is an intuitive appreciation of the trend of the ancient writer’s mind.”93 Even more important is George A. Reisner’s verdict on his extensive excavations of the tombs: “Our knowledge of the Egyptian conception of life after death is still very vague. We know that the utensils and weapons and ornaments of daily life were originally placed in the burial-chamber; . . . but we still have no exact knowledge of the details of the Egyptian conception of life after death.” The stock explanation, as we all know, was that the grave was naively conceived of as a house in which the dead went on living, supplied with all the ordinary necessities of life, but Reisner assures us, “Certainly we look in vain for a tomb which in form and plan represents a plausible reproduction of a living-house.” Instead what we find are structures “all planned to satisfy functions quite different from those of an ordinary house.”94 In short, from the Coffin Texts on, no one, according to Kees, “can get a clear picture of the Egyptian expectations of the hereafter.”95 I have strung out these annoying little details instead of confining them to the decent obscurity of a footnote in hopes of somewhat relaxing the stranglehold of the nineteenth-century positivism on some of our LDS intellectuals. This would not be necessary if they would consider some present-day trends in Egyptology.

“Quite recently,” Derchain writes, “scholars are participating in a veritable revival of Egyptian religious studies,”96 which necessarily entails taking the religion more seriously than the Old School ever did. Moreover, “recent criticism of the modern positivist attitude towards artistic and social evolution is applicable to Egypt.”97 Of prime importance is the note that the farther Egyptology progresses, the more reliable the accounts of the classical writers about Egypt appear.98 It used to be the other way around; it was unanimously agreed that the Greeks reporting on Egypt had been badly taken in by the ever-present self-appointed guides and rascally dragomans whom the learned visitors mistook for priests. The ordinary person is still at risk, wrote Meyer, so that “only an expert escapes turning the gorgeous East into a land of utter fantasy.”99

An important step has been the recognition “that many of our ideas about the early mythology are not well founded.”100 In fact, writes Anthes, “we have not yet a clear understanding of Egyptian myths.”101 Since the days of Max Mueller and the Grimms, mythology has been accepted as the natural foundation of ancient religious study. Since then, “Gardiner has pointed out that Egyptian mythological narratives are extremely rare, . . . derived from rather vague and fragmentary allusions. . . . Not a few of these texts are cryptic and unintelligible. For complete accounts of myths, we must as a rule turn to the Greek authors.”102 Eberhard Otto has shown that “the world of the Coffin Texts is primarily not a world of myth,” as has always been thought, but is “broader, more pristine, and more rich and undogmatic”—that is, a far more substantial offering than was ever supposed.”103 Constant resort to the much overworked and never defined realm of the “primitive” will no longer pass as an explanation. “The primitive in everyday life thinks exactly as we do,” Werner Kaiser pointed out, and there is no evidence that the prehistoric Egyptians ever went beyond the bounds of logical thinking.104 And Anthes concludes that “the unsophisticated so-called primitives are perhaps not primitives at all in the history of religion,”105 a lesson which Claude Levi-Strauss is now bringing home to the anthropologists and historians. Another trouble-saving word, the once ubiquitous magic, has also taken a back seat—though it is still there, its role in Egyptian religion is all but negligible in comparison with concern for the realities of cosmology.106 The predominance of myth in the interpretation of the Egyptian and other religions has been superseded by that of ritual; it was Schott who showed that the oldest religious texts are ritual and not mythological,107 even though “myth and ritual are branches of a single tree.”108 The myths usually attempt to explain the ordinances and not the other way around: “Recent studies of the earliest documents of Egyptian religion have revealed that mythical ideas grew out of the ceremonies; . . . the origin of the main myths can be traced back to the rites centering on the idea of divine kingship as established around 3000 B.C.”109 The relationship between Egyptian texts and pictures has always been puzzling. Svein Bjerke finds that the pictures show real people performing ordinances, while the accompanying vignettes report the event in terms of the original model; therefore, the participating mortals in the pictures are identified in the texts with Horus and Osiris in the act of initiating the original ceremony.110 Thus Gustave Jéquier now confirms what Gardiner showed long ago, that the wab-rite is really and truly a baptism by water.111

Another significant development is that those compositions which Erman valued as the only really precious Egyptian literature, the product of pure literary fancy and popular imagination, untainted by serious religious concern (he cites the Westcar Papyrus), are now being examined for their deeper eschatological content.112 At the same time there is a strong suspicion that the richly symbolic art of Egypt should be telling us much more than it has been. Though we call it symbolic art, we are almost totally ignorant of the thinking of those who created it.

But the most arresting development of our time has certainly been the final recognition of a real association of the Egyptian with the Hebrew literature over a long period of time, especially in the category of Wisdom literature. As far back as 1857 François J. Chabas remarked on the close resemblance between the Egyptian Wisdom texts and the books of Proverbs, Job, Isaiah, Psalms, Ecclesiastes, Wisdom, etc., but naturally concluded that these were only “sentiments natural to humanity” since of course there could be no possible connection between them. Still, he remained puzzled at finding that certain promises to the righteous were word for word the same in Ptahotep and the Decalogue.113 All along, Budge, Gressmann, Erman, Sethe, and others noted curious analogies between the Wisdom literature of the Bible and the Egyptian gnomic texts, but bravely refused to draw the obvious conclusions.114 When Gustave Lefebvre listed side by side identical statements from the tomb of Petosiris and the Bible, he marveled at the “exact parallelism of the words, the phrases, and the thought,” but hastily explained away the resemblances as “probably a fortuitous meeting of expressions and ideas.”115 When the Wisdom of Ani with its strikingly biblical passages was discovered, it was given the deep freeze by Eugène Revillout in 1902, and as late as the 1920s Wiedemann, Erman, and Reinke made no mention of the parallels in their manuals.116 In 1923 E. A. Wallis Budge suspected that the Wisdom of Solomon (e.g., Proverbs 15, 22, 23) might have come from the Wisdom of Amenemope, and in the following year Er-man actually proved it.117 It is significant that Erman was reluctant to exploit the full significance of his own discoveries of parallels between the Old Testament and Egyptian writings, which simply did not fit into the Approved School Solution.118 But since 1929 “there has never been any doubt about the influence of Egyptian wisdom on that of Israel,” in which Israel “has its closest contacts with Egypt” in “courtly wisdom.”119 Especially since World War II “an avalanche of commentaries and studies on the wisdom books” is emphasizing “the indubitable parallels between wisdom and the Egyptian Maʿat.”120 The broader search is back again; it is recognized that both Hebrew and Egyptian literature show “a certain universalism . . . common to these peoples of the Fertile Crescent. . . . Scholars have come to assume that the original setting for Israelite wisdom was the royal court” of Egypt.121 Need we recall that it was at the court of Egypt that Abraham exchanged wisdom with the natives, according to the Book of Abraham? Significantly, the old view that Egyptian Wisdom literature was almost totally utilitarian has happily been laid to rest for many years now.122

Beyond the Wisdom literature, the “great strides . . . and growing body of texts” extend to resemblances to the prophetic literature of Israel, such as passages in the Eloquent Peasant.123

Beyond Appearances

The size, manifest age, and splendor of the Egyptian show is after all only a façade. Greatness is not to be achieved by special effects; the evidences of power and wealth and the ceremonial patriotism of our own day “wherein doth sit the dread and awe of kings,” are at best indications of greatness, but it is not greatness itself. The Lord, if we will recall, uses the figure of the “whited wall” that looks impressively chaste and proper—but what is behind it? We have all seen how the sets at Universal City crumble and collapse after a few years. But the Egyptian façade does not crumble and collapse, though subjected from time to time to appalling forces of destruction such as have wiped out other civilizations. There must be something behind it, and we think we know what it is.

First, let us remember that Egyptian culture is a unified and monolithic religious structure. From the earliest to the latest, the writers of the sacred books “all assumed the existence of the same beliefs in their readers”—Erman’s Durchschnittsreligion.124 What gave the Egyptians their strength? It is religion, but more than that it is one particular doctrine, a gospel in the proper sense of the word; it is what Alexandre Moret called “a revelation concealed by hieroglyphics.”125 In Egypt alone we see the same teachings handed down, adapted but unaltered from the earliest time to the latest in the well-known procession from the Shabako text to the Pyramid Texts to the Coffin Texts, Book of the Dead, Books of Gates and Hours, Book of Breathings, and beyond.126 Hans Bonnet, who compiled the Encyclopedia of Egyptian Religion, chides the others for not “enquiring after the inner content and religious thrust (Ertrag)” of things and asks whether at this late date we ever really can know what was in the minds of those strange people.127 Today we would approach the problem by the ubiquitous questionnaire or poll. With the wealth of clues at our disposal we can ask the Egyptians themselves what they are getting at. It is their symbols that give them away. Everywhere we look we see them; the Egyptians seemed positively obsessed with them. And what is their order of priority; what really concerns the Egyptians most?

Life, the ankh-symbol, easily comes first. And since life is everything desirable, its curtailment is more than anything else to be avoided—what inscription or ceremony does not end with the signs for time and eternity—neheh (nḥḥ) with its everlasting circle and ḏjet (ḏ.t) guaranteeing not merely a spiritual survival, but a solid reality? Consistent with this, the next most common symbols are those that always follow the king’s name: after ankh (ʿnḫ) comes wedja (wḏȝ) and seneb (snb)—not only an everlasting and real existence, but one with all organs, parts, and dimensions completely restored and in perfect running condition. Next the was-scepter of divine authority, the ḏjed-pillar (ḏd) of ever-renewed stability, and, of course, the endlessly discussed Maat, the assurance that balance, justice, righteousness—in a word, truth— must prevail.

If life is the issue, there is one question that supersedes all others—the big question and in the end the only question. In view of the fact that “concern for the dead is the most outstanding characteristic of the Egyptians,” Kees observed, “it is most strange that students never ask why this should be so.”128 The answer is self-evident, but modern man does not like it because he finds it infinitely depressing. “The greatest gift that God can bestow upon the children of men,” said Brigham Young, “is the gift of eternal life; that is, to give mankind power to preserve their identity—to preserve themselves before the Lord.”129 Preserve themselves, that is, as individuals, not as essences reabsorbed into a sea of being or reconciled by strenuous mental discipline to accepting nonexistence as a beatitude. The Egyptian wants to go on as himself. We see it in the Coffin Texts, the passionate desire to know all, escape all confinement, enter in among the enlightened ones and pass onward and upward as the lower world yields its bonds to the qualified and the informed.130 At all times Egyptian “religion seems to rest on unified concepts, with the individual phenomena subordinated to these as variations on a basic theme. . . . The creation, maintenance, and continuation of life beyond death, in the cosmos as well as on earth, are central to the religion of Ancient Egypt. . . . After creation . . . the vital force of all creatures has to be preserved for eternity, this being accomplished by a continuous renewal or rejuvenation.”131 “Eternal lives” is the theme.

And the Egyptians had a definite plan for achieving it, set forth in the medu-netcher (mdw-nṯr), the Words of God coming down from the beginning and from on high.132 When a great king said, “I would see god as he is, I would act according to the gods’ command, . . . I would act as a god acts,” he was instructed in reply to go to the library, “the House of Life,” and search the holy books in which he discovered, “I am his Son who shall save his Father; I am in his image; and . . . I teach you to know the true way of life”—the plan.133 “Don’t count on length of years,” said a great Egyptian teacher of the Old Kingdom, “for after all a lifetime is but an hour, . . . but eternal existence lies beyond. A fool may make light of it, but he who has reached it without wrongdoing shall continue yonder like a god.”134

We have to do with a specific doctrine and a specific course of action prescribed by it, requiring specific times and places of observation. Most enduring edifices in the world are temples and tombs, both places of passage and inseparably connected. The temple is what the Egyptologist William J. Murnane calls “a model of the world ‘writ small’”135 or, as we have often said, a scale model providing a place where you take your bearings on the universe; hence the orientation of the temples, ceilings covered with stars and star calendars on the walls (decans and zodiacs), obelisks and apertures to mark the passage of the sun, stairways, ramps and passages, etc. The tomb, like the temple, is now seen to be a place of passage which one enters “to be regenerated, but not for a permanent stay”; one must descend there to comprehend “the cosmos as a whole . . . as one elementary universal structure which is mythically presented in the form of a series of pictures” to provide the dead with a “compendium of all knowledge.”136 As in the temple, pictures and texts taken together “present a veritable system of the universe”;137 it is no longer the dead end, the place “to lie in cold obstruction and to rot,” but is a center of action. The Egyptian Book of the Dead, like the Tibetan one, is concerned particularly with the exact moment of passage from one world to the other, that fearful passage described by the persons interviewed in Dr. Raymond Moody’s well-known studies; the problem, as Erik Hornung expresses it, is to get as close to the Nahtstelle, the interface, as possible, when there is just a chance that we might get “a peek through a chink in the wall.”138

The three motifs that confront us wherever we turn in temple and tomb are eternity, family, and cosmos. As to family, the gods themselves do not appear in solitary splendor in the great temples, but always have the rest of the family along, as the individual in his tomb wants to be seen in the intimate and loving company of his wife and children; whether gods, kings, or commoners, they hold hands and embrace in an easy and affectionate manner. Of particular interest are those ordinances in the Coffin Texts “for sealing a man’s family to him in the next world, his father, his mother, his brothers, his sisters, servants and attendants”—all in whom he has an interest.139 Egypt itself was organized as a great family, “beginning with the father-son relationship and going up to the god-god relationship.”140

Real survival as an individual and family calls for a real world hereafter, a viable ambience; like the earliest Christian apologist, Aristides, the Egyptian was not willing to settle for allegories and abstractions. “Egyptian religion,” wrote Alexandre Piankoff, “is a physical science . . . strangely reminiscent of the ideas of Heraclitus of Ephesus.”141 It was not, says Derchain, “modern religion, but rather a cosmology, a true physical science,” a “véritable physique vitaliste,”142 in which entropy is always at work and must be countered: “by the mind (esprit) alone chaos is held at bay, and all collapses when the mind is withdrawn.”143 But like quantum physics, it was a physical science which went beyond the Baconian realm of the obvious, extending to a serious Wissenschaft vom Jenseits (science of the beyond) of the great age “but nonetheless creatively researched.”144 It reminds one of the so-called “anthropic principle” in modern physical science. The thought is reinforced and implemented by ordinances— words and symbolic actions. The two basic laws are (1) multiple emergences—that is, the idea that there are many valid ways of attacking a problem, and (2) the principle of proxy, especially with the relationship to sacrifice.

The most concise and ancient statement of the doctrine, found in the so-called Shabako text, is in the opinion of Sethe, Junker, Breasted, and others “the most instructive which we possess for the inner content of Egyptian religion.”145 By this document, “the impact of the Memphite Theology was so fundamental,” writes Louis V. Å½abkar, that its effect and influence on Egyptian religious thought remained constant until the end of the Egyptian religion.

Unparalleled in the history of the ancient Orient as far as its cosmogenic significance is concerned, it traveled from century to century, from one theological system to another; its theme resounds from the first line of Genesis, and from there on through the Old Testament and the latest period of Hebrew literature it reaches the pages of the New Testament, witnessing to what an extent its conception of the creative power of the Word of God persisted in the ancient Orient, becoming a universal theological theme.146

More than that, “the Memphite Theology, through the Old Testament, prepared . . . the consciousness of the religious world for John’s Logos doctrine about the manifestations and creative power of the Word of God, so the Amarna Theology sounded some themes which in the New Testament and especially in John’s Gospel represent the fundamental features of the relation between the Father and the Son.”147

Is that going too far? Do we really owe so much to a civilization that passed away so long ago? Wilson, doubting “whether anything vitally essential can be transmitted from one culture to another,”148 asks why the Greeks gave the Egyptians so much credit. He finds the answer in the façade: “It was impossible to visit Egypt without respectful awe before the mighty pyramids and vast temples,” and being taken in by that “air of mysterious profundity,” which still impresses everybody. But from the list of great names attached to testimonials of Egyptian Wisdom, this explanation seems, to say the least, superficial. Specifically, for Wilson, “the influence of Egypt did not shape the Hebrews and the Greeks. They were shaped by their own experiences and their own inner dynamism.”149 But the Hebraism and Hellenism that the schoolmen handed on to conventional Christianity and normative Judaism was that which came from the schools at Alexandria where the Egyptian spell was never missing. If Joseph the Hebrew in the celebrated legend of Joseph and Asenath became Pharaoh after marrying the daughter of the High Priest of Heliopolis (an event testified by Genesis 41:45, 50; 46:20), no less did Alexander the Greek base his legitimacy as the Cosmocrator of the age wholly on his being a true pharaoh, a son of Amon.

Alexandria was not a hostile enclave of intellectuals in the empty shell of a burnt-out civilization. It was founded by Alexander and built up by his successors, schools, temples and all, full of their calling as sons of Amon; they had displaced a dynasty founded by the Persian Darius I who was as dedicated to his Pharaonic calling as Alexander himself; in fact, his greatest work was the temple of Amon at the Khargah Oasis with its great Hymn to Amon. Cambyses’ stay in Egypt was a voyage of information to study the art of government in Egypt, which became for the Persians, as later for the Greeks, a veritable school of government. The caesars followed suit; every one of them received the title of Pharaoh, for which calling some displayed true enthusiasm.150 While the schoolmen have been unanimous in giving all credit to the Greeks and denying all to the Egyptians, the Greeks, who were not noted for their modesty, were just as unanimous in giving all credit to the Egyptians; and in reply the professors have been unanimous in declaring that those clever Greeks did not know what they were talking about and had merely been taken in by transparently phony Egyptian guides. It is a ridiculous situation, but it now becomes clear that the more we discover about the Egyptians, the more we realize that the Greeks were telling the truth after all. Here is a recent example: the first Ptolemy in founding his dynasty sought to be a sound, standard-model pharaoh and, following the example of the founders of other dynasties, brought the history of the land up-to-date, assigning the famous historian Hecataeus of Abdera to write a history showing that Egypt had been the “home of wisdom from time immemorial.”151 Now Professor Jaeger discovered that it was Hecataeus who first applied the term historia to human affairs,152 borrowing it from the medical vocabulary, where it signified the description of the progressive symptoms of a disease. It so happens that a newly found teaching from the Fifth Dynasty describes the state in just such medical terms. So it was an Egyptian idea after all.

If we list the names of ancient philosophers and scientists who supposedly studied in Egypt, we find that the common quality of their teachings is the inextricable intermingling of the sacred and profane. For these people there is no such thing as the strictly profane, though the nineteenth-century professors did their best to separate the categories. Can we admit that these Egyptians had the true religion? It is always possible to sound the buzzword pagan to put them in their place. Thus when Schott is impressed by the close resemblance of certain Middle Kingdom funeral rites to the Christian sacraments, he quickly extricates himself from embarrassing questions by observing that the sacraments are “of course something entirely new and original.”153 In the same way, the Dead Sea Scrolls, when they seem to threaten the originality of both Christianity and Judaism, are simply thrust aside, and Breasted was able to dismiss the Book of Abraham because Abraham the monotheist could have absolutely nothing to do with the polytheistic paganism of Egypt, a statement that sounds amusing today.

Along with the resemblances that disturb both the ministry and the Old School go connections—connections everywhere. Let us begin with the Bible. That same Ptolemy who wished to shore up his new dynasty with a history from the beginning was assured that the record would not be complete without the books of Moses, which went back to the creation, and so under his direction the Septuagint, still the oldest existing version of the Torah, was produced at Alexandria as a royal Egyptian project. In turn that became the official text of the Old Testament cited throughout the New Testament as we have it today.

And speaking of façades, as you wander about our national capital, you will see the Roman influence on all sides and wisely explain to the children that they really go back to the Greeks. But why stop there? On to Egypt and the oldest stone buildings in the world, to Saqqara, where we find rows of graceful, white, shining, fluted columns. Following the examples of classical historians, the art historians were a very long time in admitting that the first real classical sculpture, the Apollo Kouros figures, are dead ringers for Egyptian portrait statues. And as to the greatest monument of them all, the Washington Monument, what is it but an Egyptian obelisk, dedicated with a solemn display of Masonic Egyptianry?154

Which brings us to the Hermetic tradition. Hermes, the Egyptian Thoth, wrote the sum and substance of all wisdom in the beginning, and from ancient times until the present, individuals and groups, countless secret societies and conventicles—the best known of which is the Masonic Order—have attempted to trace their origin to Egypt. Whatever the true and pristine stream may have been, among the adherents of the tradition have been some of the greatest and most productive and most original minds in science and literature.

Turning to conventional Christianity, a few names deserve mention. The famous catechetical school of Alexandria, which ran parallel to its celebrated university, the Museion, was first headed in the second century by Pantaenus, who was sent by the Coptic Bishop of Alexandria to preach in India. The great Clement of Alexandria was next head of the school, followed by his even more illustrious pupil Origen, the true fountainhead of Christian theology from which St. Augustine drew most of his teachings. Note the name—Origen, Born of Horus. Hardly less are St. Augustine and Christian theology indebted to Neoplatonism for the substance of their teaching; that movement was founded by Ammonius Saccus—again, note the name, “He belongs to Amon.” The definitive statement of conventional Christian faith is the Nicene Creed composed by Athanasius, the metropolitan of Alexandria, while its great rival was the teaching of an equally fervid Egyptian, Arius. As if to prove his deep Egyptian roots, Athanasius for a while went to live in the desert with St. Anthony, a humble Egyptian peasant, who as the official founder of monasticism, was simply following in the footsteps of other pious Egyptians before him. His way of life became a discipline of world historical importance when it was properly organized with rules and regulations by St. Pachomius. Pachomius was a Roman—that is, a Byzantine soldier, who while cracking down on Egyptian villagers was so impressed by their gentle and charitable ways toward even the insolent soldiery that he became converted, followed the example of Anthony, and laid down the Rule of Pachomius under which the monks lived “in complete harmony and perfect discipline within a structure that looked like a vast Roman fortification,” writes Professor Aziz S. Atiya,155 though it looked even more like the busy and massively walled precinct of an Egyptian temple. The Rule of Pachomius and the Life of Anthony became the franchise of that Western monasticism to which we commonly attribute the preservation of letters and learning in the Western world through the Dark Ages and on into the Renaissance, though it should be mentioned that the monks of the order also went forth from Egypt to carry on their work in India and Ethiopia. But as a beginning student of European literature, starting with Anglo-Saxon, I was puzzled to find the earliest vernacular documents from Italy, Switzerland, Gaul, Ireland, and Britain to be the work of monks from the Thebaid—Upper Egypt, of all places. They seem to have given us everything we had.

But still the open-minded inquirer asks the question: Did the Egyptians really have something? And the answer is yes. Their greatness lies in their refusal to accept as closed a case which the officious constables, pompous judges, and the brain-washed public considers settled once for all. They were honest enough to recognize that the evidence is far from complete, and until it is, it is they, and not we, who remain open-minded.

An Egyptian expression for “everything” was netet yutet (nt.t -wt.t), meaning everything of which I am aware plus everything of which I am not aware, which is infinitely vaster. The Egyptian always makes allowance for that margin of possibilities which Erman deplored. Even the “apparently shocking contradictions, in their teaching, have a great usefulness,” as Jéquier notes, “since they show us that the final truth has not yet been found.”156 This, Karl Popper tells us, is the essence of the scientific attitude.

An important feature of Egyptian architecture of temple, tomb, and even palace is a door, sometimes shown as a curtain or lattice, through which a spirit can pass, a means of communication between two worlds; and the literature is full of ceremonial and mythical doors and gates and instructions on how to pass them. Now the sum and substance of modern wisdom is that there is nothing behind the door— there lies the emptiness, the world of Pascal’s libertine. “Existentialist nausea has found its home in the most affluent and technologically advanced parts of the world.”157 How do we know there is nothing behind that door? The Egyptians realized that they did not have the answer, but their temples were storehouses of the past from which nothing was ever thrown away; in Erman’s famous metaphor, the Egyptian always had some of the primal eggshell still sticking to him. What they did have was hints, clear indication that at some time men knew something that would make a great deal of difference to us if we knew it. It was these hints that kept them going, and today it is widely recognized that science itself is advanced by the thrust of a thousand hints. It is to the credit of the Egyptians, not to their shame, that they never gave up looking even when they were not sure.

“Never on earth,” wrote Meyer, “was such a strenuous and persistent attempt undertaken to make the impossible possible in spite of everything; . . . the Egyptian believed in deadly earnest on this possibility.”158 “The impression made on the modern mind,” writes Professor Edwards, “is that of a people searching in the dark for the key to truth, and having found not one but many keys resembling the pattern of the lock, retaining all less perchance the appropriate one should be discarded.”159

“Possibility,” “perchance”—those are the key words. A sense of possibility allows for one’s own ignorance, and it leaves the door open. Sir John Eccles, the great authority on the brain, speaking of a possible hereafter, writes, “The unknown future that might be ours could be the fulfillment of our present life; and if we cannot assert its inevitability, we can at least accept its possibility as the greatest of all gifts.”160 A mere possibility, the greatest of all gifts in the eyes of this Nobel Laureate.

Following Pascal’s lead, we can put the situation in the terms of a wager or a lottery. As long as there is any chance at all of winning what you desire more than anything else, why not take a chance, instead of pigheadedly insisting that the game is already lost because your winnings are not guaranteed? If you bet against the hereafter, said Pascal, and win, you win nothing; if you bet for it and win, you win everything. Either way you have no way of knowing how it will turn out, but even if the chances against it were a thousand to one, it would still be worth it to take the chance. It has always been held by the humanists that it is the hardheaded realities of science that force us to take our stand, in William James’s terms, “on the firm foundation of unyielding despair”; it is they and not the scientists who have sung from the beginning nos habebit humus; it is they and not the scientists who have insisted with relentless iteration on the nox perpetua una dormienda, that night of mere oblivion toward which all things are relentlessly moving.

The only question is whether there is really any chance of winning. To the Egyptian embraced by an almost celestial natural ambience, the answer was obvious: Look around you! Whatever made the world where you find yourself, even if it was only a series of accidents, has already proven itself quite capable of carrying out an infinitely complex series of operations which somehow accrue to your advantage, though men may not see, know, or even suspect its existence. The explosive exchanges, permutations, and combinations of natural forms and symbols that cover the walls of Egyptian tombs and temples express the conviction that all sorts of things are possible. As Whitehead puts it, “the religious insight is the grasp of this truth: That the order of the world, the depth of reality of the world, the value of the world in its whole and in its parts, the beauty of the world, the zest of life, the peace of life, and the mastery of evil, are all bound together—not accidentally but by reason of this truth: that the universe exhibits a creativity with infinite freedom, and a realm of forms with infinite possibilities.”161 Isn’t it just possible that there may be a place for you in that vast segment of reality the netet yutet (nt.t -wt.t), of which we in our present state know nothing? The Egyptian steps into a bog when he leaves this life, but we step into a bottomless pit; he may pass through mists of darkness but we go with Catullus into perpetual night; nor can we evade the Big Question by joining the fashionable crowd of sophisticates partying in “the great and spacious building.” The Egyptian message and example to us is the same as that of science and our own religion—keep looking! And therein lies their true greatness, that in spite of everything they never shut the door on other worlds.

Notes

^1. Heinrich Schäfer, “Einiges über Entstehung und Art der ägyptischen Kunst,” ZÄS 52 (1915): 6.

^2. Hermann Kees, Totenglauben und Jenseitsvorstellungen der alten Ägypter: Grundlagen und Entwicklung bis zum Ende des mittleren Reiches (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1926), 2.

^3. Claas J. Bleeker, “The Pattern of the Ancient Egyptian Culture,” Numen 11 (1964): 76–77.

^4. Alan H. Gardiner, Egypt of the Pharaohs: An Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961), 54.

^5. Ibid., 53.

^6. Kees, Totenglauben, 2–3.

^7. Claas J. Bleeker, Egyptian Festivals: Enactments of Religious Renewal (Leiden: Brill, 1967), 8.

^8. Walter B. Emery, Archaic Egypt (Baltimore: Penguin, 1962), 123–24, 128.

^9. Kurt Sethe, Zur Geschichte der Einbalsamierung bei den Ägyptern und einiger damit verbunder Bräuche (Berlin: Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1934), 230–31.

^10. Siegfried Morenz, Ägyptische Religion (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1960), 207.

^11. Max Guilmot, “Les lettres aux morts dans l’Égypte ancienne,” Revue de l’histoire des religions 170 (1966): 1.

^12. Gertrud Thausing, Der Auferstehungsgedanke in ägyptischen religiösen Texten (Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 1943), 19.

^13. John A. Wilson, The Culture of Ancient Egypt (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951), 75.

^14. Adolf Erman, Die Religion der Ägypter: Ihr Werden und Vergehen in vier Jahrtausenden (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1934), 10.

^15. Rudolf Anthes, “Mythologie und der gesunde Menschenverstand in Ägypten,” Mitteilungen der deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft 96 (1966): 15.

^16. Siegfried Schott, Hieroglyphen: Untersuchungen zum Ursprung der Schrift, in Abhandlungen der Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse, 1950.24 (Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1950), 16–17.

^17. Kurt Sethe, Dramatische Texte zu altägyptischen Mysterienspielen: Das “Denkmal memphitischer Theologie” der Schabakostein des Britischen Museums, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte und Altertumskunde Ägyptens 10.1 (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928), 1:64–65.

^18. Wolfhart Westendorf, Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture of Ancient Egypt (New York: Abrams, 1968), 51.

^19. Wilson, Culture of Ancient Egypt, 75.

^20. Ibid., 117.

^21. Westendorf, Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture, 55.

^22. Philippe Derchain, Le Papyrus Salt 825 (B.M. 10051): Rituel pour la conservation de la vie en Égypte (Brussels: Palais des Académies, 1965), 1:11.

^23. Siegfried Schott, “Falke, Geier und Ibis als Krönungsboten,” ZÄS 95 (1968): 60.

^24. Hermann Kees, Ägypten, Religionsgeschichtliches Lesebuch 10, ed. Alfred Bertholet (Tübingen: Mohr, 1928), 42.

^25. Das Buch vom Sieg über Seth, in Siegfried Schott, Urkunden mythologischen Inhalts, Urkunden des ägyptischen Altertums 6 (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929), 19–25.

^26. Hermann Kees, Ägypten, Kulturgeschichte des Alten Orients 1 (Munich: Beck, 1933), 284.

^27. The words from Percy Bysshe Shelley’s sonnet “Ozymandias” adorned the walls of the Ramses II exhibit in Provo.

^28. So I. E. S. Edwards, The Pyramids of Egypt (Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1947), 211–12.

^29. See especially Kurt Mendelssohn, “A Scientist Looks at the Pyramids,” American Scientist 59 (1971): 218.

^30. For example, Isocrates, Oratio de Busiride 12–30.

^31. Nibley’s rendition; cf. Alan H. Gardiner, “New Literary Works from Ancient Egypt,” Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 1 (1914): 26.

^32. Nibley’s rendition; cf. Gardiner, “New Literary Works,” 103–4.

^33. Erman, Die Religion der Ägypter, 10.

^34. Peter Kaplony, “Eine neue Weisheitslehre aus dem alten Reich: Zusätze und Nachträge,” Orientalia 37 (1968): 343.

^35. Wilson, Culture of Ancient Egypt, 73.

^36. Diodorus, Bibliotheca Historica 40.2–3.

^37. Hermann Grapow, Die bildlichen Ausdrücke des Ägyptischen: Vom Denken und Dichten einer altorientalischen Sprache (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1924), 20–21.

^38. Westendorf, Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture, 61.

^39. John A. Wilson, “The Artist of the Egyptian Old Kingdom,” JNES 6 (1947): 249.

^40. Adolf Erman, Mein Werden und mein Wirken (Leipzig: Quelle und Meyer, 1929), 256–57.

^41. Raymond Weill, “Les transmissions littéraires d’Égypte à Israël,” Cahier complémentaire à la Revue d’Égyptologie (1950): 52 and 57.

^42. Erman, Die Religion der Ägypter, 1.

^43. Ibid., 11–12.

^44. Alan H. Gardiner, “Hymns to Sobk in a Ramesseum Papyrus,” Revue Egyptologique 11 (1957): 55–56.

^45. Gardiner, Egypt of the Pharaohs, 427.

^46. Gardiner, “Hymns to Sobk,” 55.

^47. Wilson, Culture of Ancient Egypt, 58.

^48. Ibid., 145.

^49. Ibid., 307.

^50. Giorgio de Santillana, The Origins of Scientific Thought: From Anaximander to Proclus, 600 bc to 300 ad (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961), 12.

^51. Michael Adler, “Was Homer Acquainted with the Bible?” Jewish Quarterly Review 5 (1892): 171.

^52. Erik Hornung, Das Totenbuch der Ägypter (Zürich: Artemis, 1979), 12–14.

^53. Erman, Werden und Wirken, 76.

^54. See Adolf Erman, “Die Bentrechstele,” ZÄS 21 (1883): 54–55.

^55. Peter L. Renouf, The Life-Work of Sir Peter Le Page Renouf, ed. Edouard Naville and W. Harry Rylands (Paris: Leroux, 1903), 2:257.

^56. Ibid., 254.

^57. Theodor Hopfner, Orient und Griechische Philosophie (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1925), 32–33.

^58. Erman, Werden und Wirken, 258.

^59. Ibid., 163.

^60. Ibid., 248.

^61. Ibid., 164, 170.

^62. Ibid., 210, 246.

^63. Ibid., 281.

^64. Ibid., 279.

^65. Ibid., 279–80.

^66. William F. Albright, History, Archaeology, and Christian Humanism (New York: McGraw Hill, 1964), 221.

^67. Henri Frankfort, Ancient Egyptian Religion: An Interpretation (New York: Columbia University Press, 1948), 59.

^68. Albright, History, Archaeology, and Christian Humanism, 226, 228.

^69. Ibid., 48.

^70. Erman, Werden und Wirken, 292.

^71. Ibid.

^72. Raymond Weill, review of Le problème des pyramides d’Égypte, by Jean-Philippe Lauer, Revue Égyptologique 7 (1950): 137.

^73. Alfred N. Whitehead, Modes of Thought (New York: McMillan, 1953), 204.

^74. Erman, Werden und Wirken, 287.

^75. Wilson, Culture of Ancient Egypt, 6.

^76. John A. Wilson, “Archeology as a Tool in Humanistic and Social Studies,” JNES 1 (1942): 4.

^77. Erman, Werden und Wirken, 84.

^78. Erman, Die Religion der Ägypter, 3.

^79. Louis Speleers, Textes des cercueils du Moyen Empire égyptien (Brussels: n.p., 1947), lviii.

^80. Ibid., xxxii.

^81. Günther Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten (Jena: Diederichs, 1915), lx, lviii (India), liii (Mesopotamia).

^82. See Eberhard Otto, “Sprüche auf altägyptischen Särgen,” Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen Gesellschaft 102 (1952): 195. Not that such thinking does not exist, but that we are as guilty of it as any other people.

^83. Erman, Werden und Wirken, 112.

^84. Klaus Koch, “Wort und Einheit des Schöpfergottes in Memphis und Jerusalem: Zur Einzigartigkeit Israels,” Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche 62 (1965): 251–52.

^85. Hermann Kees, review of Ägyptische Religion, by Siegfried Morenz, Orientalische Literaturzeitung 56 (1961): 586.

^86. Jean Garnot, La vie religieuse dans l’ancienne Égypte (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1948), v.

^87. Erman, Die Religion der Ägypter, 7.

^88. Edwards, Pyramids of Egypt, 238.

^89. T. E. Peet, The Present Position of Egyptological Studies (Oxford: Clarendon, 1934), 14.

^90. Günther Roeder, “Ägyptologie,” Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen Geselischaft 62 (1908): 191.

^91. Gardiner, Egypt of the Pharaohs, 53.

^92. Philippe Derchain, “Le lotus, la mandragore et le perséa,” Chronique d’Égypte 50 (1976): 65.

^93. Adriaan de Buck, “The Earliest Version of Book of the Dead 78,” Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 35 (1949): 87.

^94. Raymond O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969), viii, quoting Alan H. Gardiner, “The Eloquent Peasant,” Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 9/1–2 (1923): 6.

^95. George A. Reisner, The Development of the Egyptian Tomb down to the Accession of Cheops (London: Oxford University Press, 1936), 244.

^96. Kees, Totenglauben, 235.

^97. Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:3.

^98. Elizabeth Finkenstädt, “Violence and Kingship: The Evidence of the Palettes,” ZÄS 111 (1984): 107.

^99. See Kees, Totenglauben, 2.

^100. Eduard Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1909), 1:2:10.

^101. Anthes, “Mythologie und der gesunde Menschenverstand,” 33.

^102. Rudolf Anthes, review of The Shrines of Tut-ankh-Amun, by Alexandre Piankoff, Artibus Asiae 20/1 (1957): 92.

^103. Cited by Gerardus van der Leeuw, “The Contendings of Horus and Seth,” Egyptian Religion 2 (1934): 106.

^104. Otto, “Sprüche auf altägyptischen Särgen,” 195.

^105. Werner Kaiser, review of Die Geisteshaltung der Ägypter in der Frühzeit, by Hermann Junker, Orientalische Literaturzeitung 58 (1963): 340–41.

^106. Rudolf Anthes, “Egyptian Theology in the Third Millennium B.C.,” JNES 18/3 (1959): 184.

^107. Ibid.

^108. H. Brunner, review of Bemerkungen zur ägyptischen Baukunst des alten Reichs II, by H. Ricke, and Bemerkungen zum ägyptischen Pyramidenkult, by Siegfried Schott, Orientalische Literaturzeitung 9/10 (1962): 160.

^109. Henri Frankfort, “Pyramid Temples and the Religion of the Old Kingdom,” Bibliotheca Orientalis 10 (1953): 160.

^110. Anthes, review of The Shrines of Tut-ankh-Amun, 93.

^111. Svein Bjerke, “Remarks on the Egyptian Ritual of ‘Opening the Mouth’ and Its Interpretation,” Numen 12 (1965): 205.

^112. See Gustave Jéquier, Considérations sur les religions égyptiennes (Neuchâtel: La Baconnière, 1946), 72–78.

^113. For examples, see Hugh W. Nibley, Abraham in Egypt, 2nd ed., CWHN 14 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 2000), 219–25.

^114. François J. Chabas cited by Weill, “Les transmissions littéraires,” 44 nn. 1–4.

^115. Julien Weill, review of “Die neugefundene Lehre des Amen-em-Ope und die vorexilische Spruchdichtung Israels,” Zeitschrift für die Alttestamentliche Wissenschaft (1924): 272–96, in Revue des Études Juives 80 (1952): 112.

^116. Gustave Lefebvre, Le tombeau de Petosiris (Cairo: IFAO, 1924), 37–41, quotation on 41.

^117. But see Hermann Gunkel, “Ägyptische Parallelen zum Alten Testament,” Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen Gesellschaft 63 (1909): 531–39.

^118. Adolf Erman, “Eine ägyptische Quelle der Sprüche Salomos,” Sitzungsberichte der preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophischhistorische Klasse 15 (1924): 86–93.

^119. Erman cited by Weill, “Les transmissions littéraires,” 47 n. 2.

^120. Roland E. Murphy, “Hebrew Wisdom,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 101 (1981): 27.

^121. Ibid., 21.

^122. Ibid., 26.

^123. Cf. Michael V. Fox, “Two Decades of Research in Egyptian Wisdom Literature,” ZÄS 107 (1980): 120–35.

^124. R. J. Williams, “The Sages of Ancient Egypt in the Light of Recent Scholarship,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 101 (1981): 1.

^125. E. A. Wallis Budge, Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection (New York: Dover, 1973), 1:ix.

^126. Alexandre Moret, Histoire de l’Orient, part 1 of Histoire générale: Histoire ancienne (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1929), 1:230.

^127. Hornung, Das Totenbuch der Ägypter, 20. The archaic palettes tell the same story as the rest. See Martin Kaiser, “Das exotische Ägypten,” ZÄS 97 (1971): 78–94.

^128. Hans Bonnet, cited by Kees, review of Ägyptische Religion, 586.

^129. Kees, Totenglauben, 1.

^130. Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 6:333.

^131. For example, see Coffin Text 154, in Adriaan de Buck, The Egyptian Coffin Texts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1938), 2:266–89.

^132. Westendorf, Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture, 2–3.

^133. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 1; and Adolf Erman and Hermann Grapow, Wörterbuch der ägyptischen Sprache (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1928), 2:180–81.

^134. Max Pieper, Die grosse Inschrift des Königs Neferhotep in Abydos: Ein Beitrag zur ägyptischen Religions- und Literaturgeschichte (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1929), 73–74.

^135. Gardiner, “New Literary Works,” 27.

^136. William J. Murnane, United with Eternity: A Precise Guide to the Monuments of Medinet Habu (Chicago: Oriental Institute, University of Chicago, 1980), 6.

^137. Hornung, Das Totenbuch der Ägypter, 25–26.

^138. Philippe Derchain, “La pêche de l’oeil et les mystères d’Osiris a Dendara,” Revue d’Égyptologie 15 (1963): 20.

^139. Hornung, Das Totenbuch der Ägypter, 38.

^140. Coffin Texts 131–37, in de Buck, Coffin Texts, 2:151–72.

^141. Alexandre Moret, “La condition des feaux dans la famille, dans la société dans la vie d’outre-tombe,” Recueil de travaux 19 (1897): 148.

^142. Cited in Derchain, Papyrus Salt 825, 1:4.

^143. Ibid., 7, 5.

^144. Ibid., 5.

^145. Hornung, Das Totenbuch der Ägypter, 26.

^146. Koch, “Wort und Einheit des Schöpfergottes,” 254.

^147. Louis V. Zabkar, “The Theocracy of Amarna and the Doctrine of the Ba,” JNES 13 (1954): 87.

^148. Ibid., 87.

^149. Wilson, Culture of Ancient Egypt, 316.

^150. Ibid., 317.

^151. Cf. Moret, Histoire de l’Orient, 1:757–58.

^152. John E. Sandys, A History of Classical Scholarship (New York: Hafner, 1964), 1:162.

^153. See Werner Jaeger, Paideia: The Ideals of Greek Culture, trans. Gilbert Highet (New York: Oxford, 1945), 2:179. Most of this comes from personal conversation.

^154. Siegfried Schott, Die Deutung der Geheimnisse des Rituals für die Abwehr des Bösen: Eine altägyptische Übersetzung, in Abhandlungen der geistes- und sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse, 1954.5 (Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1954), 6.

^155. Peter Tompkins, The Magic of Obelisks (New York: Harper and Row, 1981), 319–23.

^156. Aziz S. Atiya, The Copts and Christian Civilization (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1979), 13. Most of the facts in this paragraph are supplied by Professor Atiya’s book.

^157. Jéquier, Considerations zur les Religions Egyptiennes, 7.

^158. René Dubos, So Human an Animal (New York: Scribner’s Sons, 1968), 14–15.

^159. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, 1:2:171.

^160. Edwards, Pyramids of Egypt, 27–28.

^161. John C. Eccles, “The Mystery of Personal Existence,” Scholar and Educator 7/1 (1983): 17.

28

Meanings and Functions of Temples

This subentry, under the entry Temples, was published in the Encyclopedia of Mormonism (New York: Macmillan, 1992), 4:1458–63; this appears to be an abbreviated version of Hugh Nibley, “What Is a Temple,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:355–90.

The temple is the primal central holy place dedicated to the worship of God and the perfecting of his covenant people. In the temple his faithful may enter into covenants with the Lord and call upon his holy name after the manner that he has ordained and in the pure and pristine manner restored and set apart from the world. The temple is built so as to represent the organizing principles of the universe. It is the school where mortals learn about these things. The temple is a model, a presentation in figurative terms, of the pattern and journey of life on earth. It is a stable model, which makes its comparison with other forms and traditions, including the more ancient ones, valid and instructive.

The Cosmic Plan

From earliest times, temples have been built as scale models of the universe. The first known mention of the Latin word templum is by Varro (116–27 B.C.), for whom it designated a building specially designed for interpreting signs in the heavens—a sort of observatory where one gets one’s bearings on the universe. The root tem-in Greek and Latin denotes a “cutting,” or intersection of two lines at right angles, and hence the place where the four regions of the world come together, ancient temples being carefully oriented to express “the idea of preestablished harmony between a celestial and a terrestrial image.”1 According to Varro, there are three temples: one in heaven, one on earth, and one beneath the earth.2 In the universal temple concept, these three are identical, one being built exactly over the other, with the earth temple in the middle of everything, representing “the pole of the heavens, around which all heavenly motions revolve, the knot that ties earth and heaven together, the seat of universal dominion.”3 Here the four cardinal directions meet, and here the three worlds make contact. Whether in the Old World or the New, the idea of the three vertical levels and four horizontal regions dominated the whole economy of such temples and of the societies they formed and guided.

The essentials of Solomon’s temple were not of pagan origin but a point of contact with the other world, presenting “rich cosmic symbolism which was largely lost in later Israelite and Jewish tradition.”4 The twelve oxen (1 Kings 7:23–26) represent the circle of the year, and the three stages of the great altar represent the three worlds. According to the Talmud, the temple at Jerusalem, like God’s throne and the law itself, existed before the foundations of the world.5 Its measurements were all sacred and prescribed, with strict rules about it facing the east.

Its nature as a cosmic center is vividly recalled in many passages of the Old Testament and in medieval representations of the city of Jerusalem and the Holy Sepulchre. These show the temple as the exact center, or navel, of the earth. It was in conscious imitation of both Jewish and Christian ideas that the Muslims conceived of the Kaʿba in Mecca as “not only the centre of the earth, [but] the centre of the universe. . . . Every heaven and every earth has its centre marked by a sanctuary as its navel.”6 What is bound on earth is bound in heaven. From the temple at Jerusalem went forth ideas and traditions that are found all over the Jewish, Christian, and Muslim worlds.

The Place of Contact

As the ritual center of the universe, the temple was anciently viewed as the one point on earth at which men and women could establish contact with higher spheres. The earliest temples were not, as once supposed, permanent dwelling places of divinity but were places at which humans at specific times attempted to make contact with the powers above. The temple was a building “which the gods trans-versed to pass from their celestial habitation to their earthly residence. . . . The ziggurat is thus nothing but a support for the edifice on top of it, and the stairway that leads . . . between the upper and lower worlds”;7 it resembled a mountain, for “the mountain itself was originally such a place of contact between this and the upper world.”8

Investigation of the oldest temples represented on prehistoric seals concludes that these structures were also “gigantic altars,” built both to attract the attention of the powers above (the burnt offering being a sort of smoke signal) and to provide “the stairways which the God, in answer to these prayers, used in order to descend to the earth, . . . bringing a renewal of life in all its forms.”9 From the first, it would seem, towers and steps for altars were built in the hope of establishing contact with heaven (Genesis 11:4).

At the same time, the temple is the place of meeting with the lower world and the one point at which passage between the two is possible. In the earliest Christian records, the gates and the keys are closely connected with the temple. Some scholars have noted that the keys of Peter (Matthew 16:19) can only be the keys of the temple, and many studies have demonstrated the identity of tomb, temple, and palace as the place where the powers of the other world are exercised for the eternal benefit of the human race.10 The gates of hell do not prevail against the one who holds these keys, however much the church on earth may suffer. Invariably temple rites are those of the ancestors, and the chief characters are the first parents of the race.11

The Ritual Drama

The pristine and original temple rites are dramatic repetitions of the events that marked the beginning of the world. This creation drama was not a simple one, for an indispensable part of the story is the ritual death and resurrection of the king, who represents the founder and first parent of the race, and his ultimate triumph over death as priest and king, followed by some form of hieros gamos, or ritual marriage, for the purpose of begetting the race. This now familiar year-drama is widely attested—in the Memphite theology of Egypt, in the Babylonian New Year’s rites, in the great secular celebration of the Romans, in the panegyris and beginnings of Greek drama, in the temple texts of Ras Shamra, and in the Celtic mythological cycles. These rites were performed “because the Divinity—the First Father of the Race—did so once in the beginning, and commanded us to do the same.”12

The temple drama is essentially a problem play, featuring a central combat, which may take various mimetic forms—games, races, sham battles, mummings, dances, or plays. The hero is temporarily beaten by the powers of darkness and overcome by death, but calling from the depths upon God, “he rises again and puts the false king, the false Messiah, to death.”13 This resurrection motif is essential to these rites, whose purpose is ultimate victory over death. These rites are repeated annually because the problem of evil and death persists for the human race.

Initiation

The individuals who toiled as pilgrims to reach the waters of life that flowed from the temple were not passive spectators. They came to obtain knowledge and regeneration, the personal attainment of eternal life and glory. This goal the individual attempted to achieve through purification (washing), initiation, and rejuvenation, which symbolize death, rebirth, and resurrection.

In Solomon’s temple, a large bronze font was used for ritual washings, and in the Second Temple period, people at Jerusalem spent much of their time in immersions and ablutions. Baptism is one specific ordinance always mentioned in connection with the temple. “When one is baptized one becomes a Christian,” writes Cyril, exactly as in Egypt by the same rite one becomes an Osiris14—that is, by initiation into immortality. The baptism in question is a washing rather than a baptism, since it is not by immersion. According to Cyril, this is followed by an anointing, making every candidate, as it were, a messiah. The anointing of the brow, face, ears, nose, breast, etc., represents “the clothing of the candidate in the protective panoply of the Holy Spirit,” which however does not hinder the initiate from receiving a real garment on the occasion.15 Furthermore, according to Cyril, the candidate was reminded that the whole ordinance is “in imitation of the sufferings of Christ,” in which “we suffer without pain by mere imitation his receiving of the nails in his hands and feet: the antitype of Christ’s sufferings.”16 The Jews once taught that Michael and Gabriel will lead all the sinners up out of the lower world: “they will wash and anoint them, healing them of their wounds of hell, and clothe them with beautiful pure garments and bring them into the presence of God.”17

Loss of the Temple Ordinances

The understanding of the temple and its ancient rites was eventually corrupted and lost for several reasons. Both Jews and Christians suffered greatly at the hands of their enemies because of the secrecy of their rites, which they steadfastly refused to discuss or divulge because of their sanctity. This caused misunderstanding and opened the door to unbridled fraud: Gnostic sects claimed to have the lost rites and ordinances of the apostles and patriarchs of old. Splinter groups and factions arose. A common cause of schism, among both Jews and Christians, was the claim of a particular group that it alone still possessed the mysteries of God.

The rites became the object of various schools of interpretation. Indeed, mythology is largely an attempt to explain the origin and meaning of rituals that people no longer understand. For example, the Talmud tells of a pious Jew who left Jerusalem in disgust, wondering, “What answer will the Israelites give to Elijah when he comes?” since the scholars did not agree on the rites of the temple.18

Ritual elements were widely copied and usurped. The early Christian fathers claimed that pagan counterparts had been stolen from older legitimate sources, and virtually every major mythology tells of a great usurper who rules the world.

Comparative studies have discovered a common pattern in all ancient religions and have traced processes of diffusion that spread ideas throughout the world. The task of reconstructing the original prototype from the scattered fragments has been a long and laborious one, and it is far from complete, but an unmistakable pattern emerges.19

Reconstructions of great gatherings of people at imposing ceremonial complexes for rites dedicated to the renewal of life on earth are surprisingly uniform. First, there is tangible evidence, the scenery and properties of the drama: megaliths; artificial giant mounds or pyramids amounting to artificial mountains; stone and ditch alignments of mathematical sophistication correlating time and space; passage graves and great tholoi, or domed tombs; sacred roads; remains of booths, grandstands, processional ways, and gates—these still survive in awesome combination, with all their cosmic symbolism.

Second is the less tangible evidence of customs, legends, folk festivals, and ancient writings, which together conjure up memories of dramatic and choral celebrations of the creation, culminating in the great creation hymn; ritual contests between life and death, good and evil, and light and darkness, followed by the triumphant coronation of the king to rule for the new age, the progenitor of the race by a sacred marriage; covenants; initiations (including washing and clothing); sacrifices and scapegoats to rid the people of a year of guilt and pollution; and various types of divination and oracular consultation for the new life cycle.

Other Functions of the Temple

Many things surrounding the temple were not essential to its form and function but were the inevitable products of its existence. The words hotel, hospital, and Templar go back to those charitable organizations that took care of sick and weary pilgrims traveling to the holy places. Banking functions arose at the temple since pilgrims brought offerings and needed to exchange their money for animals to be sacrificed, and thus the word money comes from the temple of Juno Moneta, the holy center of the Roman world. Along with that, lively barter and exchange of goods at the great year-rites led to the yearly fair, when all contracts had to be renewed and where merchants, artisans, performers, and mountebanks displayed their wares.

Actors, poets, singers, dancers, and athletes were also part of temple life, the competitive element (the agonal) being essential to the struggle with evil and providing the most popular and exciting aspects of the festivals. The temple’s main drama (the actio) was played by priestly temple actors and royalty. Creation was celebrated with a creation hymn, or poema—the word poem meaning “creation”—sung by a chorus that, as the Greek word shows, formed a circle and danced as they sang.20

The temple was also the center of learning, beginning with the heavenly instructions received there. It was the Museon, or home of the Muses, representing every branch of study: astronomy, mathematics, architecture, and fine arts. People would travel from shrine to shrine exchanging wisdom with the wise, as Abraham did in Egypt. Since the Garden of Eden, or “golden age” motif, was essential to this ritual paradise, temple grounds contained trees and animals, often collected from distant places. Central to the temple school was the library, containing sacred records, including the “Books of Life,” the names of all the living and the dead, as well as liturgical and scientific works.

The temple rites acknowledged the rule of God on earth through his agent and offspring, the king, who represented both the first man and every man as he sat in judgment, making the temple the ultimate seat and sanction of law and government. People met at the holy place for contracts and covenants and to settle disputes.

The Temple and Civilization

All this indicates that the temple is the source, and not a derivative, of the civilizing process. If there is no temple, there is no true Israel; and where there is no true temple, civilization itself is but an empty shell—a material structure of expediency and tradition alone, bereft of the living organism at its center that once gave it life and made it flourish.

Many secular institutions today occupy structures faithfully copied from ancient temples. The temple economy has been perverted along with the rest: feasts of joy and abundance became orgies; sacred rites of marriage were perverted; teachers of wisdom became haughty and self-righteous, demonstrating that anything can be corrupted in this world, and as Aristotle notes, the better the original, the more vicious the corrupted version.

The Restoration and the Temple

Latter-day Saint temples fully embody the uncorrupted functions and meanings of the temple. Did the Prophet Joseph Smith reinvent all this by reassembling the fragments—Jewish, Orthodox, Masonic, Gnostic, Hindu, Egyptian, and so forth? In fact, few of the fragments were available in his day, and those poor fragments do not come together of themselves to make a whole. Latter-day Saints see in the completeness and perfection of Joseph Smith’s teachings regarding the temple a sure indication of divine revelation. This is also seen in the design of the Salt Lake Temple. One can note its three levels; eastward orientation; central location in Zion; brazen sea on the back of twelve oxen holding the waters through which the dead, by proxy, pass to eternal life; rooms appointed for ceremonies rehearsing the creation of the world; and many other symbolic features.

The actual work done within the temple exemplifies the temple idea, with thousands of men and women serving with no ulterior motive. Here time and space come together; barriers vanish between this world and the next, between past, present, and future. Solemn prayers are offered in the name of Jesus Christ to the Almighty. What is bound here is bound beyond, and only here can the gates be opened to release the dead who are awaiting the saving ordinances. Here the whole human family meets in a common enterprise; the records of the race are assembled as far back in time as research has taken them, for a work performed by the present generation to assure that they and their kindred dead shall spend the eternities together in the future. Here, for the first time in many centuries, one may behold a genuine temple, functioning as a temple in the fullest and purest sense of the word.21

Notes

^1. Alfred Jeremias, Das alte Testament im Lichte des alten Orients (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1916), 49–51.

^2. Varro, De Lingua Latina 7.8.

^3. Alfred Jeremias, “Semitische Völker in Vorderasien,” in Daniel P. Chantepie de la Saussaye, Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte, 2 vols. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1925), 1:513.

^4. William F. Albright, Archaeology and the Religion of Israel (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1942), 154–55, 167.

^5. Babylonian Talmud Pesahim 54a–b.

^6. Gustav E. von Grunebaum, Mohammadan Festivals (New York: Schuman, 1951), 20–21.

^7. André Parrot, Ziggurats et Tour de Babel (Paris: Michel, 1949), 208.

^8. George Contenau, Le déluge babylonien (Paris: Payot, 1952), 246.

^9. Pierre Amiet, “Ziggurats et ‘Culte de Hauteur’ des origines a l’Epoque d’Akkad,” Revue d’Assyriologie 47 (1953): 30.

^10. Alexandre Moret, Histoire de l’Orient (Paris: Presses Universitaires, 1929), 1:218–37, 365, 377. The theme is treated at length in Samuel H. Hooke, ed., The Labyrinth (London: SPCK, 1935).

^11. See, for example, Otto Huth, Janus: Ein Beitrag zur altrömischen Religionsgeschichte (Bonn: Rohrscheid, 1932), passim.

^12. Sigmund Mowinckel, Religion und Kultus (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1953), 94.

^13. Arendt J. Wensinck, “The Semitic New Year and the Origins of Eschatology,” Acta Orientalia 1 (1922): 184–85.

^14. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis XXI, Mystagogica III de Chrismate (Catechetical Lecture on the Chrism) 1, in PG 33:1088. Julius Firmicus Maternus, De Errore Profanarum Religionum (The Error of the Pagan Religions) 22–23, in PL 12:1030–33, also comments on the perfect identity of Christian and Egyptian initiation rites, and attributes it to the plagiarism of the latter.

^15. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechetical Lecture on the Chrism 4, in PG 33:1093.

^16. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis XX, Mystagogica II de Baptismi Caeremoniis (Catechetical Lecture on the Rites of Baptism) 5, in PG 33:1081.

^17. Rabbi Akiba, cited by Samuel Aba Horodezky, “Michael und Gabriel,” Monatsschrift für Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums 72 (1928): 505.

^18. Babylonian Talmud Pesahim 70b; on the role of Elijah, see Aharon Wiener, The Prophet Elijah in the Development of Judaism (London: Rout-ledge and Kegan Paul, 1978), 68–69.

^19. See Nibley, “What Is a Temple,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1987), 367.

^20. See ibid., in CWHN 4:380.

^21. A brief bibliography accompanied this entry in the Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 4:1463.

29

A House of Glory

This talk, entitled “The Vital Link,” was given on 20 February 1993 at the Joseph Smith Auditorium, Brigham Young University, as a part of the Sixth Annual FARMS Book of Mormon Symposium, Temples of the Ancient World; it was published as “A House of Glory,” in Temples of the Ancient World: Ritual and Symbolism, ed. Donald W. Parry (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1994), 29–47.

There are many aspects of the temple that we could talk about. Some of these may be freely discussed in public; others may not.1 But we seem to forget that for over 150 years the Church has published, proclaimed, and circulated the most enlightening treatment of the subject, and to this no one seems to pay any attention. That is the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple. Let us briefly analyze section 109 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Verses 1–4. The temple has been built by express command as a means of administering salvation to the children of men. The Saints have responded, and as the Lord has called them, they now call upon the Lord. We are never passive in these matters, and here the Prophet initiates the next action. In our dealings with the Lord we are expected to move of our own volition: “Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you” (Matthew 7:7). Or as the Jews say, there must be a stirring below before there can be a stirring above; one does not ask a blessing over an empty table. The temple exists for training us: What kind of house can we build you, asks Solomon at the dedication of his temple, since the heaven is your throne and the earth is your footstool? But let us get down to business.

Figures 2 and 3. These photographs of the Kirtland Temple date to the early 1900s. The School of the Prophets met together in the attic story. Figure 3 (on the right) shows the western end of the lower court and the pulpits of the Melchizedek Priesthood. The hinged sacrament table at the front is lowered, and the privacy veils can be seen on the ceiling. It was on Sunday, 3 April 1836, after the sacrament was passed and the veils were lowered, that Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery beheld the great vision of the Savior (see D&C 110). Courtesy LDS Church Archives.

Verse 5. First of all, the temple is a place in which God manifests himself, a place of appointment, a meeting place. You will go to the tabernacle, the Lord says to Moses, “and there I will meet with thee” (Exodus 25:22; 29:42–43). When Jesus manifested himself to all the apostles after the resurrection, he arranged ahead of time, as he instructed Mary and as the angel instructed some of the apostles, that they should all meet him at a certain time in Galilee (Matthew 28:7, 10, 16; Mark 16:7). So the temple is where the people come together at a particular prescribed time and place. The next question is, what people?

Verse 6. The answer is all the Saints in “solemn assembly.” This makes them a special society that is to initiate the work of bringing all things together—a sort of grand unifying theory toward which all the sciences seem to be looking today, bringing everything together in one. It is in the temple we are taught expressly that all truth may be encompassed within a single whole.

Verse 7. They are to bring their brains with them. That is the first qualification, that your brain and intellect may be clear and active. For they are here to seek diligently, to seek out of the best books, to seek learning.” This is our initiative. We are to “teach one another words of wisdom; . . . [to] seek learning even by study and also by faith.” And from what sources? Out of the best books? Where is the list? Why no syllabus? Because we are to do the seeking. It is we who must decide which are the best books and to do that we must “prove all things [and] hold fast that which is good” (1 Thessalonians 5:21). We must make our own syllabus as part of organizing ourselves and preparing “every needful thing,” as it expressly tells us in the next verse. The temple is to be a place of study and learning, a school of real mental discipline. The temple marks the universal meeting place of all great societies. It is actually the source of everything that makes civilization.2

Verse 8. First of all, it is a house of prayer. That is most important—to make your cosmic connections and establish lines of communication with intelligence greater than ours. The main function of the temple is to supply a binding link between the worlds. Without that, it is nothing but a civic social center or a senior citizens’ club.

Next it is a house of fasting. Fasting is the most effective way to slacken the grasp of this telestial world on the mind and to move toward another ambience. To fast is to do without some normal necessities; your everyday considerations must be put aside because you will be doing other things that require a totally different mind-set. To fast is to disengage from the temporal and wasteful activities of the “real world.”

It is a house of faith. Without that, those who go through the motions are hypocrites, as the Lord told the Jews in the temple: “Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up” (John 2:19)—that would test their faith as to whether it was really God’s house. You find yourself in the temple on faith, not exactly sure whether all this is real or whether your work will be accepted, though I must say that in the temple more than anywhere else my doubts disintegrate.

Next, it is a house of learning. Is this a surprise? If we are supposed to be studying and teaching diligently, thinking deeply, we must have something to think about, as well as something to show for our mental effort. That is called learning. We are suspicious of too much learning in the Church Educational System where it is viewed as “unspiritual,” but if anyone was ever more passionately dedicated than Brigham Young to learning all he possibly could about everything he possibly could, it was Joseph Smith.

It is also a house of glory. This must come next in order. And what is glory? How do you generate that intangible quantity? Glory, we are told, is intelligence (see D&C 93:36). Can we be more specific? That says it all, but what is intelligence? Intelligence is defined as problem-solving ability— that is, intelligence is as intelligence does. What problem does it solve? It is the supremely difficult problem of endowing weak and foolish man with immortality and eternal life. God says this is his “work and [his] glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man” (Moses 1:39)—that we return to his presence and with him partake of eternal life and exaltation. Since his glory is intelligence, he shares it with us. Glory is shared intelligence. The temple is certainly the place for that.

Order comes next. What crimes have been committed in its name! We have noted that the temple is a place of disciplined thought and action, but regimentation? When I ask what the temple teaches me, the answer is loud and clear: to control my actions. That is self-discipline and that is what I promise to exercise with every covenant. The law of sacrifice requires me to do things I could more easily not do; the law of the gospel requires self-control in everyday situations, avoiding the same unseemly acts as are condemned in the instructions of the Dead Sea Scrolls, such as laughing too loudly, gossiping, and immodest dress. That chastity is nothing but self-control needs no argument. And the hardest of all, the law of consecration, can only be faced against sore temptation and still confronts us with unresolved dilemmas. What I promise to do with every covenant is to order my life and, specifically, as it is fully laid out in the Book of Moses for all the world to see, to do all that I do in the name of the Son, to “repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore” (Moses 5:8). Note that the covenant is between me and the Father. I am to order my life, and no one else is to do it for me; the only judge of my behavior is the Father. Only the two of us know how I really qualify in this. We establish our agreement in the temple because it is a house of God. He takes over completely. It is in no sense an ordinary house. This should be borne in mind at all times, even to the forgetting of time and place.

Verse 9. This makes the temple a very special place set off from the world. When you enter and leave you pass from one sphere to another. “That your incomings may be in the name of the Lord, that your outgoings may be in the name of the Lord, that all your salutations may be in the name of the Lord, with uplifted hands unto the Most High.” This is not rhetoric, it is very clear. The raised hands announce your entering and leaving the sacred place. They are a sign of recognition, as well as of praise. Common courtesy, even in ordinary society, demands signs of polite recognition upon entering or leaving a company. Like a military salute whenever the general enters and leaves, everyone rises and salutes, and he salutes too, announcing their presence to each other and getting down to business. Hence, all these greetings are “unto the Most High” for He is the general, He is the one in command. This puts everything into perspective. The next verse makes this clear.

Verse 10. “We ask thee to assist us . . . in calling our solemn assembly, that it may be done to thine honor and to thy divine acceptance.” Things must not subside into everyday routine, the light of common day. People in the temple are aware of something unusual, something definitely more than mere formal or offhand routine. This requires a discipline and concentration which may try our capacity, and so we ask God to assist us in it, in this common effort between the worlds.

Verse 11. This is made clear in the manner in which things are carried out. The state of mind is all-important. President Joseph Fielding Smith said that much temple work would likely have to be done over again because of the slipshod manner in which it was done.3 The day before yesterday I got his meaning when I enjoyed participating in just one initiatory ordinance. It was performed in such an offhand and perfunctory manner that I told one of the officiators that if I had not known the words by heart, I could not have understood a word he was saying.

Verse 12. The basic meaning of sanctified and consecrated— hagios, kadosh, sanctus, holy, etc.—is “fenced off from the world.” That is the permanent condition of the temple: “that thy holy presence may be continually in this house.” Many holy places are open to secular use throughout the year except during the formal set times of assembly and celebration. Not so with the temple; there everything that happens is removed from the everyday world.

Verse 13. All people feel power at the threshold of the Lord’s house; it “constrains” them. It is something not self-induced. Throughout history temples have enlisted the aid of incense, dance, mantras, drums, drugs, hypnosis, exhausting fasts, processions, tapers, stunning architectural settings, etc., to convince their devotees of supernatural forces. In the temple the Word of Wisdom alone secures stone-cold sobriety. John Chrysostom warned against all such stimulants, including paintings and images, as imposing an artificial discipline on the Catholic Church and striving for theatrical and emotional effect. You cannot see, hear, smell, taste, or touch power, but you can feel it, and you cannot deny what you feel, nor can you prove it to anyone else. Is not all feeling awareness of an indefinable energy? St. Augustine urged the Christians to stop depending on promptings of the Spirit because they were too vague, unpredictable, and beyond our control and suggested putting in their place office and ceremony, “forms and observances,” which can be directed and employed at will.4

Verse 14. After these initiatory statements we get down to business: what do we do in the temple? Answer: We are “taught words of wisdom out of the best books”; we “seek learning even by study, and also by faith, as thou hast said.” But do we do that in the temple? Apparently we do, for this is equivalent to “worship in this house.” The School of the Prophets was held in the temple. Central to all great temples was the great library. The temple is definitely a school, a very high school of intense study, as temples in the past have been. It was in the temple that the child Jesus astounded the wise men with his knowledge of scripture. Study is personal but your own thoughts, which may be helpful to others, should be exchanged as you “teach one another”—learning is a two-way process. Lest you be keeping something of value locked in your bosom, the temple gives you the opportunity to share what excites you. The classic words for school are schole and ludus; both have the basic meaning of play and denote a place of liberal education, where we do not concern ourselves with the business of making a living but are free to sit down, relax, and exchange ideas.

Verse 15. This verse is the classic statement of the purpose of education: “And that they may grow.” But here it is a special kind of growth: To “grow up in thee, and receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost, and be organized according to thy laws, and be prepared to obtain every needful thing”—growth, fulness, organization, not organization for organization’s sake, but to expedite “obtain[ing] every needful thing.” To do this we are instructed to stay alert, to pay attention, and to come often. We are not to sit like bags of sand but to receive a fulness—nothing left out, “every needful thing,” in short, all that one is able to receive. The Lord has much to say about fulness. If I could do more than I am doing, or carry more than I am carrying, or learn more than I am learning, etc., I am quite literally rejecting the fulness. This is a situation ominously set forth in 3 Nephi 16:10–12 where, speaking of the Church in our day, the Lord says, “If they . . . shall reject the fulness of my gospel, behold, saith the Father, I will bring the fulness of my gospel from among them . . . and I will bring my gospel unto them”—that is, another branch of Israel, the descendants of Lehi. Is the phasing out or neglecting of certain temple activities a rejection of the fulness? That is not for me to decide.

Verse 16. The next verse recapitulates: A house of prayer, of fasting, of faith, of glory, of God. These things all belong together. They are steps to exaltation; the ordinances mark distinct degrees or steps. This concept of Gradus ad Parnassum (“steps to Parnassus”) is the root of civilization.

Figure 4. A scene from Mozart’s Magic Flute, in which a priest leads Prince Tamino to his trials. The opera portrays several motifs familar to Latter-day Saint audiences, such as temple instruction concerning the meaning of life and initiation to become like the gods. Courtesy of Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY.

Verses 17–19. With incomings and outgoings in the name of the Lord and salutations with holy hands uplifted, we find ourselves in a very special society; here we are really entering into things. All temples are marked by boundaries, stations, levels, doors, stairs, passages, gates, veils, etc.— they all denote rites of passage going from one condition or state to another, from lower to higher, from dark to light, a complete transition from one world, telestial or terrestrial, to another, ultimately the celestial. At certain crucial passages one must identify oneself by an exchange of names and tokens and show oneself qualified by an exchange of words. This was characteristic of all ancient temples. It is the origin of the Hermetic tradition, which comes down to us in such altered but interesting forms as Freemasonry and such fanciful presentations as The Magic Flute, in which Mormon audiences recognize familiar motifs.

Verses 20–21. No unclean thing is permitted to come into the house and pollute it. Uncleanness and pollution, as we are increasingly aware today, are not only unpleasant but dangerous. One of the most striking doctrines of the Egyptian temple and funerary literature is that “pollution” is the name of the telestial world. We live in pollution. We take from the terrestrial world, the world as God made it, only what we find wholesome, pure, and delicious—“of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat” (Genesis 2:16). But what do we make of it? What do we return to the earth? Sewage!

In verse 21 we see the twofold function of the temple. It repels evil and pollution of the carnal world, like Teflon, while at the same time it exercises a gravitational pull upon transgressors, an urge to “clean up their act,” to wit, to “repent and return . . . and be restored.” The suggestion of the expanding or contracting universe, the ever-conflicting and creative functions of radiation and gravitation, is reinforced in the next verse.

Verse 22. Here we see the temple like some supernova, expanding irresistibly in all directions as “thy servants . . . go forth from this house armed with thy power and that thy name may be upon them, and thy glory be round about them, and thine angels have charge over them”—that is, the angels are there to supervise the operation, keeping everything running properly, an ancient Jewish and Christian teaching.

Verse 23. The great expansion goes out to the limits of time and space “unto the ends of the earth,” bearing “exceedingly great and glorious tidings . . . that thou has put forth thy hand, to fulfill that which thou hast spoken.”

Verses 24–28. Meantime, in this world it must serve as a fortress, a “safe house,” sheltered place, or marshaling area— note the buttresses and battlements and the garden walls of all our older temples. The security is guaranteed by God himself, who will both decide and execute whatever smiting and fighting needs to be done. We have neither the time nor the energy to engage in combat, and contention has been strictly forbidden in all circumstances. All the world has felt a sort of unassailable aloofness about our temples.

Verse 29. The state of the opposition is to be one of astonishment and confusion. The work is bound to invite comments and vicious fictions. This part of the prophecy has been fulfilled, strangely, no matter what position the Church has found itself in—it seems that as long as the project goes forward it will excite animosity and resistance. It is the work of the temple more than anything else, as Brigham Young noted, that sets all the bells of hell to ringing—“I want to hear them ring again!” he said.5

Verse 30. But the resistance shall be frustrated—again no comment is necessary, but there is a hint of things to come in the upheavals of our time when we are told that their works shall be “swept away by the hail.” That is ominous and by no means so fantastic as it sounded not so long ago. Hail is the infallible indicator of atmospheric extremes such as the world is experiencing today for the first time of which we are aware.

Verses 31–33. This is the historical part, something of an established pattern of recurrent events where the temple is concerned. The Saints do not enjoy a glory of the eternities cheaply; theirs is a heavy yoke to bear. This comes almost as a relief when we realize that we too are required to exert to the utmost in participating. When the building of the Provo Temple was turned over to contractors who put up signs banning all but company employees from the building site, many Latter-day Saints who remembered the building of other temples felt cheated. Since the most ancient times the building of the temple has been a work in which all, from king to peasant, joyfully participated. This could lead to riotous confusion unless the work was skillfully coordinated and directed, which it was. It was precisely the exercise demanded and inspired by the building of temples which produced the planning and discipline that gave us all the world’s great civilizations. The prompt and eager oversubscribing of money to the building of every temple shows how everyone yearns to be part of the action.

Verse 34. “As all men sin forgive the transgressions of thy people.” The history of the temple at Jerusalem was one of recurrent sinning and forgiving. It was while he was gazing at the temple that Jesus remarked to the apostles, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, . . . how often would I have gathered [you] . . . as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!” (Matthew 23:37). Again we have no real cause to complain; we know where we have fallen short. These sad conditions merely emphasize the vast importance of the issues at stake.

Verse 35. To carry us over we receive “anointing . . . sealed . . . with power from on high.” Without that power we have nothing, as we clearly see when we try to put on our own show, such as Church films of various kinds, including much sentimental kitsch with professional, non-LDS actors waxing emotional about situations that they have never experienced. Illustrations in study manuals, tear-jerking stories, photographs of sacred ordinances suffused with frosted light to make them spiritual—do we need all this rhetorical and theatrical Hollywood and Disneyland if we have the real thing? The most impressive temple sessions I have attended have been at Manti, where elderly farm people put on a far more intelligent display than the slick professionals. Do we take the real thing seriously enough?

Verse 36. “The gift of tongues . . . , even cloven tongues as of fire.” This is a strange figure. To cleave means both to stick together, glue, kleben, etc., and also to split or separate. A cloven tongue is a loosened and articulate tongue. The image here employed recalls both the two-edged sword which is the word or tongue of God, which “is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder the joints and the marrow, soul and spirit” (D&C 33:1),6 and the fiery sword of the cherubim (kherev means sword) that turned every which way, guarding the way of the tree of life.

Verse 37. The next verse confirms the use of metaphors, where “tongues as of fire” is matched by the filling of the house “as with a rushing mighty wind.” Was there real fire or a real wind? No, but there was something real that can best be described in those terms. Everything about the temple is symbolic and yet, like the equations of the scientists, goes beyond mere symbols, bidding us to look to something that lies beyond. We know that things really happened in the Kirtland Temple, where we read also of a sound as of rushing waters and hair as white wool.

Verse 38. The covenant prepares the Saints to hold up in the day of trouble. Here the words sealing and binding are significant. “Seal up the law”—you seal a thing up for preservation from the elements, the accidents, and the ravages of time. That is the situation here, for the world is going to be a dangerous place. The temple is holding open the door, so to speak, during this climactic dispensation. Is there more trouble coming? Where is the happy ending? It is here and now! As long as we have the temple, “in the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world” (John 16:33). As long as we know the happy ending, we can anticipate a better world to come in our visits to the temple.

Verse 39. We are gathering up the righteous out of the world from the cities of the world into the city of Zion. From the earliest times even wandering tribes have had their holy centers that quickly became cities. The cities where the elders have success are to serve as feeders into Zion while the destroying angels are held back and the skies darken.

Verse 40. We ask God to hold off while the gathering is going on. This is the basic principle with the Jews, the Sodom and Gomorrah situation—as long as there are righteous people to be saved, God extends the time of a wicked world. It was “in process of time” that Enoch’s converts were taken up to Zion—it lasted many years (Moses 7:21).

Verse 41. But in due time and after due warning to everyone, judgment descends. Verse 42. Here we can clearly understand that it is going to be a very close call.

Verse 43. And now comes a surprise—the acid test of the righteousness and sincerity of the Saints. They pray for the wicked mob, “O Lord, we delight not in the destruction of our fellow men; their souls are precious before thee.” We do not fall into the easy, almost irresistible temptation to classify the human race as good guys and bad guys. As long as the selection is going on, we should be as impartial as possible.

Verse 44. The decision is left entirely up to the Lord: “Thy will be done, O Lord, and not ours.” Verse 45. There can be no doubt that “in the last days . . . thou wilt pour out thy judgments, without measure.”

Verse 46. Under these horrendous conditions it is necessary to “enable thy servants to seal up the law, and bind up the testimony, that they may be prepared against the day of burning.” You seal and bind up things to keep them safe from fire and flood, or, in nautical terms, we “batten down the hatches” for what is to come, in this case a burning—can this also be partly metaphor? It makes little difference. The words sealing and binding are not vague theological jargon; they actually mean putting things in such a condition as to resist the violently destructive forces.

Verses 47–54. Here we see just such a situation in the grim business of Jackson County. After all that has happened, Joseph can pray, “Have mercy, O Lord, upon the wicked mob, . . . that they may repent of their sins if repentance is to be found.” In such a climactic condition the decision is of course entirely with the Lord. He is asked to “have mercy upon all nations.” For our part we have invaluable inside support in “the principles . . . [of the] Constitution.” Joseph has explained the Bill of Rights as the expression of those principles and the rest of the Constitution as providing a flexible means of their implementation. Whether an election is held on a Monday or Tuesday, whether a state has two or three senators, whether a majority or two-thirds shall decide an issue, these are not eternal and unchanging principles, such as free assembly, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, etc., in short, free agency.7

Verses 55–56. Verse 55 is a blessing on all the human race from “the kings [and] princes” to all “the poor, the needy, and afflicted ones of the earth.” To soften their hearts, “that their prejudices may give way before the truth, and that thy people may obtain favor in the sight of all.” The Prophet does not ask for their destruction but for a change of heart. We all must live together and the temple should not alienate anyone.

Verses 57–59. The servants are going to the ends of the earth and everywhere seek out the lost sheep; this is no time to be blasting the planet. Not only Judah but the other eleven tribes shall build the Holy City, and the faster the stakes grow the shorter will be the time. This is the gathering of Israel on a grand scale. But the whole thing will be “cut short in righteousness.” One thing is certain here. We are never going to develop Zion out of the present order of things, as many are tempted to believe during our short periods of prosperity.

Verses 60–61. The gathering is on a number of fronts. Though we “are identified with the Gentiles,” there are “many children of Jacob, who have been scattered upon the mountains.” The gathering is a complex operation entailing the cooperation of the Gentiles, Israel, the Jews, and the very mixed blood of Lehi. This refers us to Doctrine and Covenants 49:24–26: “But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose. Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains, and shall be assembled together unto the place which I have appointed. Go forth as I have commanded you.” And so we have come full circle.

Verses 62–64. This was the very time that saw the founding of Zionism at the first stirrings of the final return of the Jews to Palestine, “that Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed, . . . and the children of Judah may begin to return to the lands which thou didst give to Abraham, their father.”

Verses 65–66. “That the remnants of Jacob [the Indians] . . . be converted from their wild and savage condition to the fulness of the everlasting gospel.” Wonderfully prophetic: “At that day when the Gentiles shall sin against my gospel, and shall reject the fulness of my gospel, . . . behold, saith the Father, I will bring the fulness of my gospel from among them. And then will I remember my covenant which I have made unto my people . . . , and I will bring my gospel unto them. . . . The Gentiles shall not have power over you; but I will remember my covenant unto you, O house of Israel, and ye shall come unto the knowledge of the fulness of my gospel” (3 Nephi 16:10–12).

Verse 67. This refers to “all the scattered remnants of Israel, who have been driven to the ends of the earth.” There is no need to look in just one place or to argue about where they are.

Verses 68–74. This is the work of Joseph Smith and his brethren in leading their part of the gathering “out of the wilderness of darkness . . . [to] shine forth fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners; . . . adorned as a bride for that day when thou shalt unveil the heavens.” The apocalyptic imagery here has always suggested more than mere imagination. The grandiose panorama of the work that is going on is more magnificent than anyone could suppose. This is followed by an equally impressive picture of the state of the world. The Saints have had a part to play in this process, to be responsible to the Church when being leaders entailed particular danger—“Remember, O Lord, . . . all the presidents of thy church . . . and their immediate connections.” Hence the presidents and their families require particular consideration.

Verse 74. Flowing mountains and exalted valleys have always sounded extravagant, but today as we view our science documentaries and see the instability of the elements with tectonic movements and massive volcanic disturbances, we are not so sure.

Verses 75–76. Here we get the final break with this world as we know it. The separation and the joining are both finally completed and so we find the Saints in glory after they have been caught up to another sphere.

Verses 77–78. Adam’s prayer is repeated three times—we have come full circle and reached “an infinity of fulness.” Since there is no end to fulness, there will be no end to what we are capable of receiving—as long as we do not reject it!

Verses 79–80. The end and object of it all—to mingle with the Gods, to return to God’s presence and partake of eternal life.

Notes

^1. See, for example, Ensign 23 (March 1993), which discusses a number of aspects of the temple.

^2. Hugh Nibley, “Looking Backward,” in The Temple in Antiquity, ed. Truman G. Madsen (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984), 39–51.

^3. Cf. Bruce R. McConkie, ed., Doctrines of Salvation: Sermons and Writings of Joseph Fielding Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955), 2:208–9.

^4. Hugh Nibley, The World and the Prophets, CWHN 3 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1987), 243–48.

^5. Journal of Discourses, 8:355–56.

^6. Cf. Doctrine and Covenants sections 6, 11, 12, and 14, the second verse in each case.

^7. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 147–48, 326–27.

30

On the Sacred and the Symbolic

This article was published in Temples of the Ancient World, ed. Donald W. Parry (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1994), 535–621. Nibley’s original title was “Endowment History.”

The “Terrible Questions”

What are the “terrible questions”? When Clement, the earliest authentic Christian writer after the New Testament, was a student in Rome, he nearly went crazy trying to find the answers to the terrible questions. Not a professor in Rome could help him as he pestered them by asking, “Do I have a life after death? Won’t I exist at all? Couldn’t I have existed before I was born? Won’t we remember anything after this life, or is the whole vast stretch of time simply to be oblivion and silence, in which we would not only not be there, but there would be no memory of our ever having been?” Such thoughts led naturally to others: “When was the world made, what was there before it was made, or was it always there? It seemed clear to me that if it was created, it would have to pass away [dissolve], and if it passed away, what then? Would it be a matter of total oblivion and silence, or something else that we can’t even imagine?”1

It was not until he met Peter at a general conference in Caesarea that Clement could get some straight answers, as Peter began telling him about the premortal existence and the council in heaven,2 telling of the fall and redemption and other things related to the gospel plan. When Clement, thinking of his dead father and mother, asks, “Will those be excluded from Christ’s kingdom who died before his ministry?” Peter answers: “Now, Clement, you are pressing me to talk about some things that cannot be openly discussed, but I will tell you as much as I am allowed to.” He then assures Clement that his parents are not in hell, although they never were baptized, and that ample provisions have been made for their salvation, which Clement may be qualified to learn of later.3 Plainly, the early Christians had something close to what we would call an endowment—that is, a confidential discipline which dealt head-on with those terrible questions.

Has modern science put the questions to rest or come up with satisfying answers? Consider the conclusion of a book entitled Black Holes by an eminent nuclear physicist:

We have come to the end of our story about the universe. It is full of violent actions and grim forebodings, of horrors unfolded and mysteries still to be explored. . . . The natural reaction to such a tale is that . . . each of us can continue to live our lives untouched by these immensities and by the catastrophes to come. The satisfaction gained from the simple round of life need be unaltered even when seen against this vast backdrop of the universe. We may live and die without raising up our eyes to the heavens, secure in the safety of our cotton-wool globe. Yet that is false. We cannot divorce our lives from . . . the basic problems . . . of the universe. It is the answers, or lack of them, which determine our actions, even from day to day. For whatever we do, we must somehow come to terms with the infinite before we can act [one act has another for a goal, but the highest-level goals are always there]. . . . The highest-level goals . . . are based on the wish to survive and for loved ones to survive. This is the highest-level goal of all. . . . The wish for survival, in one form or another, is absolutely essential for our continued existence.4

The conclusion then is that we, for all our modern sophistry, cannot escape the terrible questions. But “survival, in one form or another,” leaving everything up in the air, is hardly a scientific solution. That only carries us as far as the cemetery at best, and C. P. Snow reflects pointedly on the plight of the greatest scientists of his generation: “Does anyone really imagine that Bertrand Russell, G. H. Hardy, Rutherford, Blackett and the rest were bemused by cheerfulness as they faced their own individual state?” In the crowd, they were the leaders; they were worshipped. But, by themselves, “they believed with the same certainty that they believed in Rutherford’s atom that they were going, after this mortal life, into annihilation.”5 Against this, they only had to offer the nature of scientific activity—its complete success on its own terms. But it is whistling in the dark when they are all alone.

The word endowment is well chosen in both its forms— endowment and enduement—which Joseph Smith uses interchangeably. To endow is to bestow a gift on one, to furnish or enrich with something in the nature of a gift; it is to enrich, clothe, invest, furnish. The last named is nearer to endue, suggesting the Greek endyō, “take upon oneself, clothe, to put on.”6 The Latter-day Saints’ endowment is in the nature of endowment insurance, in which the policy provides for the payment of an endowment at the expiration of a fixed term of years, and only when the recipient has fulfilled certain stipulations. Such ideas were new to many of the Saints. “Be assured, brethren,” said Brigham Young, there are but few, very few of the Elders of Israel . . . who know the meaning of the word endowment. To know, they must experience; and to experience, a temple must be built. Let me give you the definition in brief. Your endowment is, to receive all those ordinances in the House of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell.7

“We come into this world weak and frail mortals,” as Charles C. Rich explained it. “We have an agency given us, with an opportunity of doing good and evil. We are invited to obey the gospel, which embraces principles that will endow the willing and obedient with exaltation and eternal life.” It is that opportunity to direct our actions toward the eternities that makes this “a glorious world, for it is here we are enabled to obtain our blessings and endowments.”8

The endowment was not only necessary to the exaltation of the individual, but to the spreading of the gospel in its fulness, a spreading of light to the nations.9 Joseph Smith said, “A man of God should be endowed with all wisdom knowledge & understanding to teach & lead people,”10 not only in the Church, but throughout the world: they were first “to be endued” in Kirtland, “and then the Elders would go forth and each must stand for himself,”11 that individually and collectively the Saints might have the satisfaction of “seeing the blessings of the endowment rolling on and the kingdom increasing and spreading from sea to sea.”12 In order to spread the light and knowledge effectively, God has gathered “the people of God in any age of the world . . . to build unto the Lord an house” in which to receive the ordinances. “This was purposed in the mind of God before the world was, . . . to prepare them for the ordinances & endowment, washings & anointings, . . . administered in a house prepared for the purpose” in every dispensation of the gospel.13

Something of the richness and scope of the endowment is indicated in Joseph Smith’s record of the first time it was “administered in its fulness” on 4 May 1842:

I spent the day . . . instructing them in the principles and order of the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchizedek Priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days, and all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the Firstborn, and come up and abide in the presence of Eloheim in the eternal worlds. In this council was instituted the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days, . . . things spiritual, and to be received only by the spiritual[ly] minded.14

Naturally, great knowledge can only be received by degrees; it is not all a single package. “Abraham’s endowment . . . was greater than that which his descendants Aaron and Levi would be allowed,” for “Abraham’s patriarchal power . . . [was] the greatest yet experienced in [the] church.”15 The Prophet gave the nine Brethren “the Endowment ordinances in their fullness for the first time” on the above date.16

The endowment itself is eternal and essentially unchanging, and hence there is only one: “God purposed . . . that there should not be an eternal fullness until every dispensation should be fulfilled and gathered together in one . . . unto the same fullness and eternal glory; . . . therefore He set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels to reveal them.”17 It is an “ancient order of things” restored “for the first time in these last days,”18 “after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch, it being after the order of the Son of God; which order came, not by man, . . . but of God.”19 “The gospel has always been the same; . . . Noah was a preacher of righteousness. He must have been baptized and ordained to the priesthood by the laying on of hands, etc.”20 The mysteries of godliness are “the ordinances of the temple preparing us for life in the eternities,” and the whole thing is endless (see D&C 19:10–12), prepared from the foundations of the world (see D&C 128:5). “It is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times . . . that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories . . . be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time” (D&C 128:18). “Whenever men can find out the will of God and find an administrator legally authorized by God, there is the kingdom of God.”21 To be endless is to be divine, “then shall they be gods, because they have no end, . . . because they continue” (D&C 132:20).

The Temple

The Prophet insisted emphatically that there could be no proper endowments until a house was built for them: “Finish that temple and God will fill it with power.”22 The idea of the temple is a compelling one, not just spiritual, but supremely practical. If people are to come together and act in union, a specific time and place must be stipulated with the proper appointments for the planned activities. One collection of studies, The Temple in Antiquity, notes that all temples have in common a specific “place, cult, and personnel.”23 At all times, the temple was, as it was for ancient Israel, “the place which Jehovah, your God, has chosen out of all your tribes to put his name there for his dwelling; ye shall seek out that place and go there” (Deuteronomy 12:5, author’s translation). It is still the place where all things are gathered in one, “appointed by the finger of the Lord, . . . even the place of the temple” (D&C 84:3–4).

The mystique of the temple lies in its extension to other worlds; it is the reflection on earth of the heavenly order, and the power that fills it comes from above. That is why all the middot, or sacred measurements, of the building have to be so carefully observed (see 1 Kings 6:2–36). So in modern times, all is “according to the pattern . . . given . . . hereafter” (D&C 94:5). How the temple is put into phase with the cosmos itself appears in the dedication. The description of the surveying of the foundation of the great temple at Edfu, still preserved on the walls there, vividly recalls a like event in St. George: “Precisely at 12 m., President Brigham Young, at whose side stood Presidents John W. Young and Daniel H. Wells, broke ground at the south-east corner, and, kneeling on that particular spot, he offered the dedicatory prayer.”24 The southeast corner was selected, Brigham Young explained, because that is where the light comes from. Coordination of time and place by the stars and the compass set the earthly temple into the framework of the cosmos. The word temple itself expresses the idea most clearly.25

The temple is a multipurpose structure with but one object, just as the endowment is a series of ordinances all having the same end. For the Jews, there and there only “you shall bring your sacrifices. . . . There you shall hold your feasts before the Lord joyfully with your families” (Deuteronomy 12:6–7, author’s translation); all great public events and celebrations were centered there. For the Latter-day Saint, it was to be a house of prayer, of fasting, of faith, of learning, of glory, of order (see D&C 88:119; 109:8). It is a school, “that all those who shall worship in this house may be taught words of wisdom out of the best books, and that they may seek learning even by study, and also by faith” (D&C 109:14). The Saints are to “prepare . . . for that which is to come” (D&C 1:12), “ that they may be perfected in the understanding of their ministry, in theory, in principle, and in doctrine” (D&C 97:14). It is a place of refuge in a hostile world (see D&C 97:27–28), and the center from which the Brethren go forth into that world to “proclaim thy word, . . . seal up the law, and prepare the hearts of thy saints for all those judgments thou art about to send, in thy wrath, . . . that thy people may not faint in the day of trouble . . . that they may gather out . . . [and] come forth to Zion” (D&C 109:38–39).

Concerning the temple in the last times: “And for the fulness of times . . . I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; and also with all those whom my Father hath given me out of the world” (D&C 27:13–14). The messengers came in quick succession: Moroni, Elias, John, Elijah, who bring all generations together; the patriarchs, who bring the covenants together; and finally Adam, or Michael, who brings all things together as “the father of all, the prince of all, the ancient of days” (D&C 27:11; cf. 27:5–14). Surprisingly, Peter, James, and John come next as we go back in time, for it was they who brought the gospel to Adam in the first place, “By whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles” (D&C 27:12). Thus the endowment—including the offices of Peter, James, and John—is already anticipated in August of the year 1830.

The Great Gap

The first step in preparing “a more gifted people” is to set them apart, to get them out of an environment in which everything exercises a downward drag in the relentless manner of gravitation. “This world is a very wicked world,” said the Prophet Joseph; “. . . The world grows more wicked and corrupt. In the earlier ages of the world a righteous man . . . had a better chance to do good, to be believed, . . . than at the present day.”26 In our world, says the Lord, “all flesh is corrupted before me and the powers of darkness prevail upon the earth” (D&C 38:11). This is no place to realize the blessings of one whose “design . . . in making man . . . was to exalt him to be as God. . . . The mystery, power and glory of the pr[ie]sthood is so great and glorious that the angels desired to understand it and cannot.”27 Those who wish to “come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly place, the holiest of all” (D&C 76:66), must be “strangers and pilgrims on the earth,” as “all holy men” have been (D&C 45:13, 12).

The first order God gave to his people was to remove themselves utterly from the world, to be completely different, holy, set apart, chosen, special, peculiar (ʿam s∂gullāh— treasured, sealed), not like any other people on the face of the earth (see Deuteronomy 7:6). If “glory, and salvation, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; kingdoms, principalities, and powers” are to be theirs (D&C 128:23), they must be sanc-tified, con-sacr-ated, hagios, qadōsh, all of which mean set off or cut off by a fence, an insurmountable wall, an unbridgeable gap. “Assemble yourselves together, and organize yourselves, . . . sanctify yourselves; yea purify your hearts, and cleanse your hands and your feet before me, that I may make you clean” (D&C 88:74). The almost fanatical insistence of the Jewish laws on a distinction between the clean and the unclean in all things has the purpose of keeping Israel from backsliding into the ways of the world. Nay, the earth itself must “be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory,” which was meant to be its permanent and proper condition (D&C 88:18, 20). Any who are not sanctified must needs “inherit another kingdom” (D&C 88:21). When “Moses . . . sought diligently to sanctify his people,” he first had to lead them into the wilderness, completely apart and by themselves (D&C 84:23). The Passover was their escape from the fleshpots of Egypt and the corruption of a world that would destroy them; it was to be eaten even with your loins girt, shoes on your feet, staves in your hands, in a hurry; and after it was finished with not a scrap left behind, the people were to hit the road and never look back (see Exodus 12:10–11). As soon as they were clear of their enemies, Moses was commanded, “Go to the people and make them holy this day and tomorrow, and they shall wash their garments” (Exodus 19:10, author’s translation). In a like circumstance, the Nephites were all to be rebaptized (see 3 Nephi 11:21; 19:10–13). The exercises of the priesthood cannot begin until the whole operation is removed from ordinary things by making the sharpest possible distinction (l∂haḇdîl) between two worlds. The elaborate instructions of Leviticus (chapters 10 and 11) telling what the people may eat and not eat, wear and not wear, who is clean and who is not, etc., are no mere priestly officiousness, but the strenuous insistence on the difference between being in the covenant and out—there is no middle ground; nothing is more important than preserving the sanitary gap between what is holy and what is ḥillal in every aspect of life (see Leviticus 20, 24, 26).

The proximity of a world in which we do not belong is a constant threat; and, preceding the endowment, Adam receives the garment that is to protect him as he goes forth into the world, not only against it, but against himself—that is, from the temptations and enticements in which he will find himself.28 It is a strict arrangement, but could one ask less of a race of priests and kings (see Exodus 19:6; Revelation 1:6), “priests and kings, who have received . . . fulness and . . . glory, . . . after the order of Melchizedek, . . . Enoch, . . . [and the] Son” (D&C 76:56–57)?

The Creation Drama

The great epics of literature begin with the poet asking the Muse the epic questions—How did it all begin? and What is it all about? The answer here takes us back to the story of the creation, beginning with the council in heaven.29 Throughout the world, the creation story has been traditionally presented in dramatic form, beginning with the prologue in heaven and the triumphant hymn of the creation.30 Ever since the “indescribable, . . . unimaginable” conditions of the “‘zeroth’ moment,” according to a study from the Harvard Observatory, the whole life of the universe has been one continual evocation of order from chaos, in which the less organized matter takes the form of ever more organized particles and forces: from chaos, to hadrons, to photons, to leptons, to atoms and on to galaxies, stars, and, finally, to living organisms and intelligent life; how it all happened is a complete and total mystery.31

The creation is not the “instantaneous and simultaneous” appearance of everything ex nihilo, to use Aquinas’s expression, nor is it an infinitely long but random series of mindless accidents: it is both a process and a planned and directed operation. The prologue is timeless; in fact, our time was not measured unto man until Adam left the garden and started counting the hours in this dreary world (cf. Abraham 5:13). For the rest, “all things . . . are manifest, past, present and future, and are continually before the Lord” (D&C 130:7). This world is to have its own time for its inhabitants, but that is all—“Is not the reckoning of God’s time, angel’s time, prophet’s time, and man’s time, according to the planet on which they reside?” (D&C 130:4). Time has been a great stumbling block in imagining these things, but the important thing is to recognize that the whole drama of the universe is a single epic; yet it is divided, as all great sagas are (for example, the Greek dramas), into distinct episodes such as a trilogy of plays, each of them consisting of three acts, each act divided into scenes. Any one of these segments could be presented as a play in itself, yet each one is tied to all the others; and from beginning to end, they are all just parts of one story. So we must understand that a creation drama is not the absolute beginning of all things; rather we break into the action which has been going on for ages, all as part of the same mighty cycle.

Thus we need not begin the story of the earth in the era of radiation or with the first atoms or molecules; neither do we begin with creatures of the primordial ooze. What concerns us is what concerns our parent, Adam. His world begins to take form when the waters which cover the earth are divided and the dry land appears (see Genesis 1:9–10; Abraham 4:9–10). The process continues, forming mountains and hills on which the forces of erosion go to work as torrential rains, making great rivers and their tributaries. So between them, mountain building and erosion are basically responsible for that variety which gives beauty to an otherwise flat and uninteresting terrain. Then comes the breakup of the cloud cover as first the sun and then the moon appear, miraculously occupying exactly the same amount of space in the sky as seen from the earth—a phenomenon which astronomers show to be inconceivable by mere laws of probability.

Since our focus is on the story of man, we skip over ages belonging to lower orders of things which have, in fact, according to the latest report, been almost totally exterminated, as one general ambience upon the earth has given way to another one. We come in on the show just as the great plant revolution takes place, when the angiosperms appear on the earth with revolutionary suddenness, a violent explosion of new life, as grass, flowers, shrubs, and trees appear, in that order. This new type of plant life, appearing so suddenly, made it possible for new types of animals to appear, beginning with the elephant and followed by the great grazing and browsing herds feeding upon the new cereals. These, in turn, gave rise to a thriving population of great carnivores, which preyed upon and depended upon the herds for their existence. Today, we are told that a layer of iridium deposited around the world, perhaps by meteors, marks the abrupt extinction of almost every life form at the end of the age of dinosaurs and the equally sudden appearance of totally new life forms in the tertiary, which is actually labeled the “new world,” in which man at last appears.32

It would seem that man at first was something of a primitive, like a small child, living happily with the animals in a timeless world, which only receives passing notice, since his real career does not begin until he marries into the covenant (see Moses 3:21–24).33 Having been properly wed to Eve, with her he takes the great step forward by accepting God’s law, after which they enter another world, the Garden of Eden.

Most Glorious and Beautiful

At a very early time, mountains, hills, rivers, and streams were expressly intended to provide variety and beauty to the scene. When the earth was finally in a proper state to receive man, the makers agreed that it was good and beautiful (see Genesis 1:25; Moses 2:25). It was meant to remain so. When Adam entered the garden, it was like receiving a marvelous Christmas or birthday present: an earth provided with all sorts of vegetable and animal life—everything that Adam could possibly need in it. He was invited to enjoy an unlimited variety of exquisite fruits, to have a good time dressing the garden and taking good care of it; he was to be happy, and along with him all the other creatures as well: “And I, God, blessed them, and said unto them: Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth” (Moses 2:28; cf. v. 22).

Adam, now knowing what the Lord’s purpose is toward all his creatures, is put in charge of the whole project: “Have dominion . . . over every living thing that moveth upon the [face of the] earth” (Moses 2:28). This is seen throughout the ancient literature to be a charge of grave responsibility for Adam, to supervise the increase and prosperity of all creatures (though many Latter-day Saints have treated it as a license to exterminate!). When the time comes to restore that blessed state of the earth which the gospel anticipates, then “Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness; . . . Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments” (D&C 82:14).

The commandment to have joy in the garden was carried over into the world that followed, for when Adam grasped the situation, he said: “Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy. . . . And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad” (Moses 5:10–11). Likewise, when the Israelites were driven out of the lush valley of the Nile, which was “like the garden of the Lord” (Isaiah 51:3), into the dry hill country, as Adam was from the garden, God reassured them that it would still be a beautiful world if they would listen to him: “I will give you the rain . . . in his due season. . . . And I will send grass”—that is, as long as you “take heed to yourselves” (Deuteronomy 11:14–16). They are to have joy and revel in the two great commandments upon which “hang all the law and the prophets” (Matthew 22:40)—since, if they are fully observed, none of the other commandments are necessary: “and now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him . . . with all thy heart and with all thy soul” (Deuteronomy 10:12, emphasis added). The second commandment is like unto it. Since God loves all his creatures, you must do the same—you must love the stranger, the widow, and the orphan, because he loves them; you must be concerned for them, because he is concerned for them (see Deuteronomy 10:18–19). Whether in Eden or out of it, everything he has given you is his (see Deuteronomy 10:14); therefore, you should give it to all in the same spirit he does, imparting freely of your substance in joy and happiness (see Deuteronomy 15:8, 18).

Abiding by the commandments should fill us with the love of giving: “O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments . . . , that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever!” (Deuteronomy 5:29). So the first commandment given is “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, . . . soul, and . . . might” (Deuteronomy 6:5). “And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart” (Deuteronomy 6:6), failing which nothing but destruction awaits Israel, “because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things” (Deuteronomy 28:47).

When the Prophet Joseph feels to exult, he breaks into a hymn on the beauties of the natural world (see D&C 128:23). How was he brought to the Sacred Grove for the opening of this dispensation?

I looked upon the sun the glorious luminary of the earth and also the moon rolling in their magesty through the heavens and also the stars shining in their courses and the earth also upon which I stood and the beast of the field and the fowls of heaven and the fish of the waters and also man walking forth upon the face of the earth in magesty and in the strength of beauty whose power and intiligence in governing the things . . . are so exceding great and marvilous even in the likeness of him who created <them>.34

What set him to thinking was, by contrast, the world of early nineteenth-century rural America, the world that men had made, which to us seems like an Age of Innocence: “I pondered many things in my heart concerning the sittuation of the world of mankind the contentions and divi[si]ons the wicke[d]ness and abominations and the darkness which pervaded the minds of mankind [sic].”35 At the site of this tragic discrepancy, he reports, “my mind became exceedingly distressed”—it raised one of the terrible questions: “Therefore I cried unto the Lord for mercy for there was none else to whom I could go.”36

The World

From his happy situation, Adam was cast out into the world. Sacrifice became the order of the day. Adam built an altar and sacrificed. The very essence of the temple in Israel was sacrifice; every major ordinance performed there was accompanied by sacrifice, and the altar was the center of every sacred activity.37 This is recounted in Moses 5:5–7, where we find Adam offering sacrifice in obedience to God’s command “that they should worship the Lord their God.” He explained to the angel that his only reason for making the sacrifice was to obey the Lord’s command; and then it was explained to him that this was “a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten,” whose sacrifice had redeemed him on condition that he “repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore” (Moses 5:8). Repentance and sacrifice are the plan of life while we are on this earth: “the sacrifice required of Abraham in the offering up of Isaac, shows that if a man would attain to the keys of the kingdom of an endless life; he must sacrifice all things.”38 The Israelites were aware of this: “And as Jehovah thy God has redeemed thee, therefore I command thee this thing this day” (Deuteronomy 15:15, author’s translation). The first thing Moses taught the Israelites when they were alone in the desert was that each one must give something up, a freewill offering, every individual as his heart moves him. The freewill offering is absolutely required; it cannot be evaded. What makes it free is that the individual, though he must make the sacrifice, may decide for himself how much he will give, for the purpose of the sacrifice is to test him as it did Abraham (see Exodus 25:1–2; Deuteronomy 12:6–7).

The Gospel Law

The gospel was given to Adam and Eve when, “after many days” of sacrificing, “an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam” and taught him the plan of salvation (Moses 5:6–9). Adam and Eve joyfully embraced it and taught it to their children (see Moses 5:10–12). But “Satan came among them, saying: . . . “Believe it not; . . . and men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish” (Moses 5:13). The gospel entails a definite pattern or style of life best defined as the opposite of “carnal, sensual, and devilish.” One of the charges or responsibilities connected with adherence to the gospel is reiterated in the “Olive Leaf” revelation: “Organize yourselves; . . . establish a house, even a house of prayer. . . . Therefore, cease from all your light speeches, from all laughter, from all your lustful desires, from all your pride and light-mindedness, and from all your wicked doings” (D&C 88:119, 121).

As to light-mindedness, humor is not light-minded; it is insight into human foibles. There is nothing light-minded about the incisive use of satire often delivered with an undertone of sorrow for the foolishness of men and the absurdity of their pretenses. Such was the cutting humor of Abinadi addressing the priests of King Noah—there was nothing light-minded about it, though it might raise a chuckle. What is light-minded is kitsch, delight in shallow trivia; and the viewing of serious or tragic events with complacency or indifference. In this it is light-minded, as Brigham Young often observed, to take seriously and devote one’s interest to modes, styles, fads, and manners of speech and deportment that are passing and trivial, without solid worth or intellectual appeal. There are times when nonsense is not light-minded, but insightful. Horace is the classic example: his good-natured and funny satire is a sad exposure of the evils and corruption of his times, so disturbingly like our own.

As to laughter, Joseph Smith had a hearty laugh that shook his whole frame; but it was a meaningful laugh, a good-humored laugh. Loud laughter is the hollow laugh, the bray, the meaningless laugh of the soundtrack or the audience responding to prompting cards, or routinely laughing at every remark made, no matter how banal, in a situation comedy. Note that “idle thoughts and . . . excess of laughter” go together in Doctrine and Covenants 88:69.

As to light speech and speaking evil, my policy is to criticize only when asked to: nothing can be gained otherwise. But politicians are fair game—the Prophet Nathan soundly denounced David though he was “the Lord’s anointed,” but it was for his private and military hanky-panky, thinking only of his own appetites and interests. Since nearly all gossip is outside the constructive frame, it qualifies as speaking evil.

As to lustful desires and unholy practices, such need no definition, one would think. Yet historically, the issue is a real one that arises from aberrations and perversions of the endowment among various “hermetic” societies which, professing higher knowledge from above, resort to witchcraft, necromancy, and divination, with a strong leaning toward sexual license, as sanctioned and ever required by their distorted mysteries. It is surprising to find such goings-on even in sober communities like the Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay colonies and in the lives of some of the greatest figures of the Renaissance and Reformation. It was part of the mystique to be riotously oversexed, and Joseph Smith has been so accused without a shadow of justification.

The scriptural injunction to secrecy (see Psalm 25:14; Proverbs 3:32; Amos 3:7) follows from the stringent necessity of keeping a discrete distance from the world. “Pearls before swine” is not an expression of contempt, but a commentary on the uselessness of giving things to people who place no value on them, have no use for them, and could only spoil them.39 The guarding of their secrets got the early Christians into a great deal of trouble. But if there is one thing all the “mysteries” have in common, it is the insistence on secrecy.40 In many cases, the only capital some secret societies have is the capacity to mystify and excite curiosity in others—the classic instance being the Shrine of the Bottle in Rabelais’s Pantagruel.41 But for us, there is no appeal whatever in secrecy as such. Sacred things, if freely discussed in public, would invariably be distorted, vulgarized, misinterpreted beyond recognition, and so lost. “Remember that which cometh from above is sacred, and must be spoken with care, and by constraint of the Spirit,” without which spirit it is a great “condemnation” (D&C 63:64). Why should not these things become the subject of frank discussion among the Saints? Because that would make them a subject of contention, and one of the first words of the Lord to the Nephites was that there should be no contention among the people (see 3 Nephi 11:29–30). Historically, religious issues becoming the subject of contention have brought endless misery and suffering; long, horrendous wars have been fought over the issues of ordinances—baptism, chrism, sacraments, consecration, tonsure, vestments; over doctrines of salvation, atonement, original sin, and so forth; and over the dates of sacred observances.

The Ritual Enactment of Curses

The ritual performance of a curse was anciently an imitation sacrifice. The priest shed his own blood either for the king, whom he originally represented, or for the people, whom the king also represented (see 1 Samuel 13:8–14). But as he can represent them by proxy, so he too may shed his blood by proxy by the sacrificial beast. All of this, of course, is “a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten” (Moses 5:7), which atoned for the sins of all, and thus redeems or saves from death.

In the old covenant, when the leper is declared clean and his life restored, two birds are taken: one is killed and the other is drenched with its blood (see Leviticus 14:1–6) and then allowed to fly away free, taking the leper’s sins with it, while the patient is sprinkled with the same blood (see Leviticus 14:7). Being thus delivered from death, he washes his clothes, shaves his hair, and bathes. Then he brings two lambs, one for trespass, the price of sin (see Leviticus 14:8–12); its blood is placed upon the right ear of the one to be cleansed and upon the thumb of his right hand (see Leviticus 14:14). Then the priest takes the oil held in his left hand (see Leviticus 14:15), and after sprinkling it puts it on the right ear and right thumb of the healed person, where the blood had been, pouring the rest of the oil on his head (see Leviticus 14:17–18)—it is the oil of healing.42 This is a private version of the public rite in which Aaron and his sons lay their hands on the head of a ram, transferring their guilt to it, slay it, and then put the blood on their own thumbs and ears (see Leviticus 8:22–24). The ram is burnt for a sin offering as an atonement (see Leviticus 9:2–7). It is clear when one thinks back to the ram that was sacrificed in the place of Isaac, Abraham’s offering of his only son, that this all looks forward to the great atoning sacrifice, the whole idea being to celebrate our redemption from death (see Exodus 13:8–10). We are told that a covenant must be made by the shedding of one’s own blood unless a substitute can be found to redeem one (see Numbers 8:13–15). In ancient times, all the sacrifices were symbolic (see Leviticus 5), and Maimonides says that in the entire history of Israel only nine heifers were really sacrificed. Certainly one of the striking things about the newly discovered Temple Scroll is the avoidance of bloody sacrifice, which takes place only at a discrete distance from the temple.

The ear has a significance in ancient Israel. When a servant in Israel, out of pure love, wished to be sealed to a master for the rest of his life, even though free to go his own way, his bond was made sure by fixing his ear to the door with a nail driven through it (see Deuteronomy 15:16–17). It was a relatively painless operation, since there are only three nerves in the lobe of the ear. But it would be hard to find a more convincing symbol of anything fixed in a sure place (Isaiah 22:23).

One penalty is particularly interesting because of a very early Christian writing known as the Discourse on Abbatôn, which goes back to apostolic times in Jerusalem. It was discovered in a chest preserved from the earliest days of the Church in the house of John Mark’s mother. Timothy, the bishop of Alexandria, while attending a conference at Jerusalem, persuaded the aged keeper of the old Church archives to show him the book. It tells how, when the council was held at the foundation of the world and Adam was chosen to preside over the project, Satan refused to recognize him, saying, “It is meet that this man Adam should come and worship me, for I existed before he came into being. And when my father [it is the Lord speaking to the apostles] saw his great pride and that his wickedness and evil doing had reached a fullness, he commanded the armies of heaven, saying remove the token [mark, document, authorization] which is in his right hand, remove his panoply [protective armor] and cast him down to earth, for his time has come.”43 With him go all his followers, for “he is the head over them and their names are written in his hand.” The angels were reluctant to demote so great a one “and they did not wish to remove the writing from his hand. And my father commanded them to bring a sharp sickle and cut him at breast level from shoulder to shoulder, on this side and on that, right through his body to the vertebra of his shoulders.” This cost him a third of his strength and rendered him forever incapable of prevailing by force. Henceforth, he gains his ends by deception and trickery, which makes him all the more dangerous.44

Names, Signs, and Seals

A token, according to the Oxford English Dictionary, is “something given as the symbol and evidence of a right or privilege, upon the presentation of which the right or privilege may be exercised.”45 To be more specific, a sign (signum) was both a pointing (related to zeigen, teach, didactic, etc.) and a touching (touch, take, tactile, dactyl). In particular, it was the dexter, the right hand or taking hand, and as such is universal in the dexiosis of the mysteries (fig. 5). For the Manichaeans, the right hand was used for bidding farewell to our heavenly parents upon leaving our primeval home and the greeting with which we shall be received when we return to it.46 Tokens were used extensively in regulating ancient social and religious gatherings; they are all means of identification, whose main purpose is security.47

Figure 5. As illustrated on this brass coin (A) of Domitian (c. a.d. 100), the clasped hands have always represented the recognition and acceptance of those who were once apart, as well as the giving and receiving of knowledge. On the coin, the staff of Hermes and wheat stalks held between the palms represent initiation into the mysteries. The exterior of the Salt Lake Temple displays this symbol (B) under the all-seeing eye of God on its east and west center towers.

The free interchange of terms, each denoting items that may be themselves interchanged, is apparent in the law of Moses: “And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the Lord did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt. And it shall be for a sign (l∂ʾôṯ) unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial (l∂zikkārôn) between thine eyes, that the Lord’s law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the Lord brought thee out of Egypt. . . . And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt” (Exodus 13:8–9, 16).

As one approaches the camp of Israel, carefully guarded in a dangerous environment, one first gives a sign to be seen from afar. Then, being recognized, one approaches and at closer range gives his name. This establishes closer identity. Nomen est omen: every name is an epithet indicating exactly in the manner of a token above a distinguishing mark, indication, or characteristic trait, which distinguishes one from all other members of the society. To receive a new name (cf. Revelation 2:17) is to receive a new role or persona, to be identified with a particular situation or association, as is indicated by surname, family name, or nickname, each placing one in a particular relationship to society. Of great importance in the earliest tradition of the human race is the secret name by which the hero is known only to his parents; when the femme fatale wheedles the secret of this name from him, terrible things ensue (Re of the Sun’s Eye, Lohengrin, the Fisherman). After the sign and the name comes the closest approach, an actual handclasp or embrace.

The word seal, which is so important, is simply the diminutive of sign, sigillum from signum. It is a word rendered peculiar in Deuteronomy. Like the other tokens, it can represent the individual who bears the king’s seal, who bears the authority.48 Its particular value, however, is as a time-binder. The seal secures the right of a person to the possession of something from which he or she may be separated by space and time; it guarantees that he shall not be deprived of his claim on an object by long or distant separation. The mark on the seal is the same as that which he carries with him. And when the two are compared, his claim is established, but only if neither of the tokens has been altered. This is the control anciently exercised by tally sticks, such as the stick of Joseph and the stick of Judah.49

Figure 6. Symbolic clay nails inscribed with expressions of gratitude to the gods were set into the temple walls of Lagash in ornamental patterns (A) as well as in Egypt (B). The ancient god Sopdu is shown as a crowned falcon preceded by the pivot in the Pyramid Texts of Unas (C). On the Senmut astronomical ceiling (D), c. 1500 B.C., the nail symbol marks the still center around which the Bull, or Big Dipper, is fastened and revolves. Magical figures adorn this bronze nail (E) from Pergamum (c. a.d. 200).

Let us recall again that a servant was forever bound to his master in love and devotion by his own free will when his ear was nailed to a doorpost—signifying that he would never walk out on his lord; he was now bound by a sure sign. The nail as a sure fixing of contracts is one of the most ancient of symbols (fig. 6). At the center of the Germanic world was the shrine of the Irminsul, the central column or tent pole around which the universe revolved. Into this at a great gathering of the new year, the “year nail” was driven to secure the order of the cosmos for another age. The Irminsul identifies Weltnagel with the cosmic tent pole of the tabernacle—the “center stake” (yātāḏ) that holds all in place with the aid of the stakes driven like nails around it. The earliest temples of Mesopotamia have huge clay nails placed into their walls to ensure stability both architecturally and symbolically. In Egyptian, the archaic nail symbol stands for Sirius and the Sothic Cycle as well as Sopdu, the turning point of the cosmic cycle, the moment of the revival of life in the universe. In the royal tent or temple or tabernacle of the camp of Israel, the central pole of the tent was commonly identified with the pole of the heavens, and the tent itself with the Weltenmantel or expanse of the firmament.50 What kept the central stake or pole of Zion in place were the pegs, stakes, or nails driven around it to hold the ropes firmly in place.

The Law of Consecration

One important covenant that will someday govern life on earth is the law of consecration. “No covenant was ever given more easy to understand,” said Brigham Young, so when the Saints ignore it, they do it consciously. Yet it is this law to which the related steps—the law of God, the law of sacrifice, and the law of the gospel—are meant to lead us. Reluctance to fulfill this promise, the hardest of all to observe, was foreseen from the first: “If you will that I give unto you a place in the celestial world, you must prepare yourselves by doing the things which I have commanded you and required of you” (D&C 78:7). And that for the purpose and intent “that you may be equal in the bonds of heavenly things, yea, and earthly things also, for the obtaining of heavenly things. For if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things” (D&C 78:5–6).

The extreme importance of this law must be stressed, the more so since it is not well received: “And let every man deal honestly, and be alike among this people, and receive alike, that ye may be one, even as I have commanded you” (D&C 51:9). In return for this, the Lord guarantees the prosperity of the land in ancient as in modern times. And the command is to “organize my kingdom upon the consecrated land” (D&C 103:35). The land itself is consecrated for “an everlasting order for the benefit of my church, and for the salvation of men until I come” (D&C 104:1). The law will be an economic arrangement to tide us through—“in your temporal things you shall be equal” (D&C 70:14); it will be a perfectly safe undertaking since it will have the Lord’s guarantee that those who will be observing it “should be blessed with a multiplicity of blessings,” even as in ancient Israel (D&C 104:2). One day we will be required to live the law: “It is contrary to the will and commandment of God that those who receive not their inheritance by consecration . . . should have their names enrolled with the people of God” (D&C 85:3). According to the Prophet Joseph: “When we consecrate our property to the Lord it is to administer to the wants of the poor and needy, for this is the law of God.”51

The basic principles set forth are (1) insistence on absolute equality and (2) the importance of receiving it by covenant, not as a suggestion or proposition, but as a binding contract that cannot be broken. As in Israel, when “a tribute of a freewill offering” was required of every man “as he is able” (Deuteronomy 16:10, 17), it was in recognition of blessings received. The spirit of the thing is all-important; in doing this, you and every single member of the community, including strangers, must join together and be happy as one big happy family (see Deuteronomy 16:10–11). Remembering Abraham, all are to “rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God hath given unto thee, and unto thine house . . . and [to] the Levite, and the stranger that is among you . . . [that] the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow . . . may eat within thy gates, and be filled” (Deuteronomy 26:11–12). At that time you will say, “I have brought away the things of my house which have been sanctified (consecrated), and also have given them to the Levite, stranger, fatherless, widow, according to all thy commandments” (cf. Deuteronomy 26:13). All must share and share equally, and if they do this not grudgingly but “with all your heart and soul, . . . as you have promised and covenanted this day, you will be his peculiar [sealed] people, set apart, the wonder of other nations, that you may be a holy people, as he has said” (cf. Deuteronomy 26:16–19; 28:46). To preserve the spirit and letter of consecration at all times, no Israelite might charge interest on a loan, and all were bound by “the Lord’s release” to cancel all debts every seven years (Deuteronomy 15:1–3). And don’t worry about losing your capital, because God will guarantee it, “for the Lord will greatly bless you” if you do it (Deuteronomy 15:4, author’s translation).

The Saints were “bound together by a bond and covenant that cannot be broken by transgression” (D&C 82:11). “And it shall be done according to the laws of the Lord”; it is “for your good,” whatever you may think about it (D&C 82:15–16). The basic rule will be that “you are to be equal . . . to have equal claims on the properties, . . . every man according to his wants and his needs, inasmuch as his wants are just” (D&C 82:17; cf. 2 Timothy 5:6). No one can deny the tenor and meaning of Doctrine and Covenants 38: “The poor have complained before me. . . . I am no respecter of persons. And I have made the earth rich . . . and deign to give unto you greater riches, even a land of promise, a land flowing with milk and honey” (D&C 38:16–18). “Wherefore, hear my voice and follow me, and you shall be a free people, and ye shall have no laws but my laws, . . . and let every man esteem his brother as himself” (D&C 38:22, 24). “I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one, ye are not mine” (D&C 38:27). Doctrine and Covenants 42:31–32 is even stronger than this.

Following the great endowment bestowed by Christ himself on the Nephites (cf. 3 Nephi), the people enjoyed almost four generations of life on earth as it was meant to be: “And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift” (4 Nephi 1:3). So it was with the Saints in the days of the apostles who had been instructed to ask God outright, “give us this day our daily bread” (Matthew 6:11), and rejoiced in having “all things common” (Acts 4:32).

Equality and humility are what the law of consecration requires and what it begets. “In order to receive the Endowment,” said the Prophet in 1835, the brethren should “prepare the[i]r hearts in all humility for an endowment with power from on high.”52 Indeed, what later held up the giving of the endowment “concerning the Twelve” was that “they are under condemnation, because they have not been sufficiently humble in my sight, and in consequence of their covetous desires, in that they have not dealt equally with each other in the division of the moneys which came into their hands.”53 It had been a “grievous sin” that they should consider themselves unequal,54 and they were told that there would be no endowment for those who make invidious comparison or “watch for iniquity.”55

Jewish authorities, contemplating today the return of a temple to Jerusalem, are particularly worried that the old elitism of the priesthood will cause mischief and jealousy.

But under the present order, there is no rank whatever in the temple. “Under the Levitical order,” Joseph Smith explained, “only the High Priest can enter the veil, but through the Melchizedek order, all men who prove worthy may be admitted into the presence of the Lord.”56 The difference is an enormous one; it is the magnanimous principle behind our work for the dead: “In my Father’s kingdom are many kingdoms in order that ye may be heirs of God and joint heirs with me. I do not believe the Methodist doctrine of sending honest men, and noble minded men to hell, . . . but I have an order of things to save the poor fellows at any rate, and get them saved for I will send men to preach to them in prison and save them if I can.”57 It is all in the spirit of God’s own work; his infinite work and glory is “to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man,” to share everything he can with others (Moses 1:39).

“For I, the Lord, am not to be mocked in these things” (D&C 104:6)

The children of Israel were told that if they kept the law of consecration, they would be a sign and a wonder to the nations (see Deuteronomy 26:18–19; 28:1–14); but if they did not keep it, they would be another kind of sign and wonder: “They shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things” (Deuteronomy 28:46–47). Never forget, they are warned, that all they have comes from one source—they are never to get the idea that they have earned it, “lest when ye have eaten and are full, . . . and your silver and your gold has piled up, . . . you say to yourself: My ability and hard work have made for me this fortune” (Deuteronomy 8:12–13, 17, author’s translation). And no one is to think “because of my righteousness the Lord has brought me to possess the land: . . . for you are not righteous” (Deuteronomy 9:4–5, author’s translation). When the Nephites fell from grace, they kept right on building and adorning their churches and prospering greatly, “and from that time forth they did have their goods and their substance no more common among them” (4 Nephi 1:25). Though one may prosper under other schools of economy, that is not the way the Lord wants it, and the Nephites were preparing themselves for the wars of extinction that lay ahead.

One may refuse to accept the law of consecration without offense, but having once accepted it, one must follow its principles or fall under the condemnation of God. “Inasmuch as some of my servants have not kept the commandments, but have broken the covenant, . . . I have cursed them with a very sore and grievous curse” (D&C 104:4). Their acceptance of the covenant was only with feigned words, while they followed the way of covetousness. It is vain to rationalize and make special cases, for “none are exempt from this law who belong to the church” (D&C 70:10). Much economic sophistry has gone into evading the terms of this agreement, and it was on this point that the Prophet said, “Those who limit the designs of God as concerted by the grand council [of heaven] cannot obtain the Knowledge of God & I do not know but I may say they will drink in the Damnation of their souls.”58 Satan concentrates his efforts on this particular objective, using covetousness as his infallible weapon. Sex runs a very poor second in the race with greed when it comes to corrupting the hearts of men and turning them away from God, as we learn in the Enoch literature. When the Saints were told “to prepare and organize [themselves] by a bond or everlasting covenant that cannot be broken,” they were also told that “otherwise Satan seeketh to turn their hearts away from the truth, that they become blinded and understand not the things which are prepared for them” (D&C 78:10–11). And when the Brethren engaged in what they considered shrewd financial practices, the Lord spoke, “Let them repent of all their sins, and of all their covetous desires, . . . for what is property unto me? saith the Lord” (D&C 117:4). As to the properties in Kirtland—let them go! “Have I not made the earth? Do I not hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth? Therefore, will I not make solitary places . . . to bring forth in abundance? . . . Is there not room enough on the mountains . . . or the land where Adam dwelt, that you should covet that which is but the drop?” (D&C 117:6–8). The Lord ends this admonition with a stinging rebuke: Let them “be ashamed of . . . all their secret abominations, and of all [their] littleness of soul before me” (D&C 117:11).

Prayer

Prayer is designed to bring about a perfect union of minds and concentration of intelligence on a single object.59 In the direst straits, the Saints are told they can overcome if they “remain steadfast in [their] minds in solemnity and [in] the spirit of prayer” (D&C 84:61). This steadfastness requires that intense concentration and unity of thought on which the Egyptians placed such store in their temples; indeed, they felt that the continued existence of the universe itself somehow depended on unflagging mental effort on the part of those whose awareness made it a reality.

Everyone is aware that the power of thought is important on solemn occasions; but it is also demanding and exhausting, and most of the cults have traditionally taken an easier way, urging the mind to go all out by mind-altering drugs—by peyote, mushrooms, opium, marijuana, etc.; by tantric spells, yoga, drums, incense, dancing, chanting to the heavy beat; and by even more dignified procedures like pageantry, lights, vestments, temple bells, incense, litanies, spectacles, and pomp and circumstance. These have, as John Chrysostom pointed out long ago, a definite narcotic effect, no matter how mild. He warns against even statuary and paintings in the churches as at best distractions. Edward B. Lytton’s once-famous novel Zanoni gives a vivid picture of the extremes to which such shenanigans can be carried—he is writing particularly of the Masons.60 But the spirit of the gospel is intelligence, and nothing is more important than the preservation of perfect sobriety throughout, so that any manifestations that should occur may not be attributed to tricks or narcotics.

There have been many manifestations in the temples, but one does not expect them as the order of the day. Heavenly visitors have always been few and far between, for the purpose of our being here is to test us when we are left on our own. The founders of the dispensations have a virtual monopoly on the major visitations. And that is as it should be. One comet in a hundred years is quite adequate to prove beyond a doubt that comets really exist; it is not necessary to repeat their visitations every month. So the Prophet can tell the people, “I testify that no man has power to reveal it, but myself, things in heaven, in earth and in hell—and all shut their mouths for the future.”61 Do we need more? Yes, the testimony of Jesus Christ, which is available to everyone on demand.

The Sanctity of Sacred Things

To reveal sacred things is to hold their true value in contempt, to despise and throw away the endowment, the only plan ever offered mankind for eternal happiness. “There is a superior intelligence bestowed upon such as obey the Gospel . . . which, if sinned against, the apostate is left naked and destitute of the Spirit of God, and he is, in truth, nigh unto cursing.”62 They who turn away from the covenants “become as much darkened as they were previously enlightened, and then, no marvel, if all their power should be enlisted against the truth.”63 “He that will not receive the greater light, must have taken away from him all the light which he hath; and if the light which is in you become darkness, behold, how great is that darkness!”64

This was exactly the situation of the infamous “Watchers”65 in the time of Enoch. When “the works of darkness began to prevail among all the sons of men,” a sort of crash program was undertaken to stem the tide of apostasy, as “the Gospel began to be preached . . . by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God,” as well as by earthly ministers (Moses 5:55, 58). According to the very ancient, firmly established, and widely documented tradition, some of those angels who came down to call men to repentance as Watchers—to oversee and report conditions on earth—allowed themselves to be seduced by the daughters of men, forgot their calling, and fell from grace. Their unspeakable sin was to use the sacred in an unhallowed connection, even as Cain did, claiming that since they had all the ordinances, their activities were authorized of heaven. A general principle is stated in the Zohar, and with equal clarity by Joseph Smith, that “whenever the Holy One . . . allowed the deep mysteries of wisdom to be brought down into the world, mankind were corrupted by them and attempted to declare war on God.”66 Thus the Watchers “used the great knowledge entrusted to them to establish an order of things on earth in direct contradiction of what was intended by God: ‘There will be false priesthoods in the days of Seth,’ Adam prophesied, and ‘God will be angry with their attempts to surpass his power.’”67 “The angels and all the race of men will use His name falsely, for deception.” “Woe unto you who . . . pervert the eternal covenant, and reckon yourselves sinless!” was said of them.68 “Their ruin is accomplished because they have learnt all the secrets of the angels”;69 “they have received the ordinances, but have removed themselves from the way of life.” “In the days of my fathers,” says Enoch, “they transgressed . . . from the Covenant of Heaven, . . . sinned and betrayed the ethos [law of the gospel]; . . . they also married and bore children, not according to the spiritual order, but by the carnal order only.”70 “Woe unto you who . . . lead many astray by [your] lies, . . . who twist the true accounts and wrest the eternal covenant, and rationalize that you are without sin.”71 The punishment of the Watchers, like that of Cain, was to be rejected by both heaven and earth, and there are many accounts of how their great leaders remained suspended, hanging between heaven and earth (in the Book of Mormon fashion; cf. Alma 1:15) until the day of judgment.

The endowment is either the real thing or it is nothing, and if it is real or if I accept the probability that it is, I cannot compromise in the least degree. Inter finitum et infinitum non est proportio (between what is limited and unlimited, there is no way of measuring)—eternal life is an all-or-nothing proposition; one does not arrange to enjoy a brief stay in eternity or to bask in the transient glory of a special-effects heaven.

It has been a subject of wonder to students of ancient religion how well the secrets of the old mysteries were kept, though they were the heart of the religious experience and dominated thought and action; though every important person in late antiquity was initiated into the mysteries, yet to this day the literature has given no certain account of what went on. There is constant reference to them in the drama, both tragic and comic, and in poetry (Pindar), and especially in Plato. But it is always discreetly veiled: “He who has ears to hear, let him hear!” In the celebrated cases when the doings of the mysteries were exposed in tipsy or playful carouse, as in the case of Alcibiades, the outcome was disastrous and the guilty parties discredited for life.72 Actually, in revealing sacred things one gives away nothing but one’s own integrity, though that is everything. It is significant that none of the “frightful disclosures” of the temple ordinances made in the sensational literature of the nineteenth century had the expected impact—they all fizzled, as indeed they must, since to one who does not understand their significance, these sacred things have no interest at all.

In those cases where secrecy and mystification are almost the whole stock and trade of a secret society or lodge, it is understandable that much should be made of it. In the Old Kingdom of Egypt during a revolution, “the King’s Secret,” which gave him his authority and power, was exposed to common view, whereupon the kingdom collapsed. For it turned out that the awesome king’s secret was that there was no secret! It had been lost.

The Veil of the Temple

Throughout the ancient world, the veil of the temple is the barrier between ourselves and both the hidden mysteries of the temple and the boundless expanses of cosmic space beyond. An example of the former is “the veil of Isis,” which no man has lifted,73 and of the latter is the veil that hangs across the back of the last chamber in the Egyptian temple, beyond which lie eternity and the worlds beyond (fig. 7). The Jewish literature often mentions the veils between the worlds,74 and the Book of Moses clearly recalls the tradition of the book of Enoch: “Millions of earths like this . . . would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations; and thy curtains are stretched out still” (Moses 7:30).

Figure 7. Deep under his southern tomb, Djoser had his artists create a replica of a rolled reed mat (A) used as a door covering in imperishable stone and glazed tile. This “spirit door” served as a symbolic entrance into the next world, such as this doubled version in the temple Seti I built for Osiris at Abydos (B). The most sacred of the temple ceremonies were performed in front of this so-called “spirit door,” the rolled-up veil dividing this world from the next.

In the ancient temples, the partition is a veil rather than a wall to show that it is not absolutely impenetrable and that messengers can pass through it, that dim sights and distant sounds might be detected, that we are not wholly cut off from our heavenly home unless we choose to be. The idea is set forth in a passage well known to Latter-day Saints: “The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened” (D&C 110:1), and this while standing before the real veil.75 It is the place of signum et responsum to establish the identity and bona fides of one who wishes to pass. We find it in the oldest Egyptian and Babylonian texts, and it plays an important part in the Egyptian funerary literature and especially in Facsimile 2 to the Book of Abraham. In the Shabako text, an ancient religious writing, the hero in the first step of his progress passes through the veil after answering the questions and goes on to be received into the arms of his father and mount his throne.

Early in this century, Sir Aurel Stein discovered some graves in a seventh-century cemetery. In one of the tomb chambers, two veils were found, one still hanging suspended from wooden pegs;76 they were near life-size and showed the king and queen in a formal embrace at the veil, the king holding up the square on the right side and the queen holding the compass on the left (fig. 8). Located at the navel was the sun as the center of the system, from which twelve spokes extended to the white dots in the circle, indicating the twelve-month course of the year, or the life cycle. At the side of the two intertwined figures appears the Big Dipper. It was at once recognized that the scene represents the sacred marriage of the king and queen at the New Year, celebrating the new age and inaugurating the new life cycle with the drama of creation. The compass and square are viewed as the instruments marking out both the pattern of the universe and the foundations of the earth.77

Figure 8. Though Fan Yen-Shih accepted a Buddhist name and was praised as a good Confucian bureaucrat, he also included Taoist paintings of the First Ancestors. Fu Hsi on the right holds a square, and his sister/wife Nü-wa holds up a compass. The encircling constellations place them at the time of creation when she drew the circle of heaven and he ruled the four-cornered earth.

The Archaic Order

One can easily detect familiar echoes of the endowment in religious institutions and practices throughout the world.

The phenomenon is readily explained by Joseph Smith, and students of comparative religion have now come around to the same conclusion—namely, that the real endowment has been on earth from time to time and has also been spread abroad in corrupted forms so that fragments from all parts of the world can be traced back to common beginnings. “It is reasonable to suppose,” wrote Joseph Smith, “that man departed from the first teachings, or instructions which he received from heaven in the first age, and refused by his disobedience to be governed by them.”78 “But . . . man was not able himself to erect a system or plan with power sufficient to free him from a destruction which awaited him”; hence it was necessary to put him on the track again, as “from time to time these glad tidings were sounded in the ears of men in different ages of the world.”79 “Certainly God spoke to [Abel]: . . . and if He did, would He not . . . deliver to him the whole plan of the Gospel? . . . And if Abel was taught of the coming of the Son of God, was he not taught also of His ordinances?”80 The cosmic connection is never missing from this archaic knowledge, as is well known today, and the Prophet wrote, “For our own part we cannot believe that the ancients in all ages were so ignorant of the system of heaven as many suppose.”81 He then went on to show how Abraham too had the endowment.82 For the Prophet Joseph, the patriarchal priesthood was “this ‘holy order’ of parents and children back to Adam.”83 “The endowment you are so anxious about you cannot comprehend now, nor could Gabriel explain it to the understanding of your dark minds.”84

Because of the inevitable tendency of men to stray “as the sparks fly upward” (Job 5:7), the tradition has been contaminated. Thus, according to Joseph Smith, “Free Masonry, as at present, [is] the apostate endowments, as sectarian religion [is] the apostate religion.”85 Some surviving institutions, including the “old Catholic Church,”86 are deserving of respect, though without authority. “Bro Joseph ses Masonry was taken from the Preasthood, but has become degenrated, but menny things are perfect [sic].”87

In view of all this, it is instructive to view particular cases in which the most impressive survivals of the old endowment shine through clearly; usually it is those things which appear to conventional religion and scholarship incongruous, meaningless, or absurd. The Old Testament itself is full of such things.

Traces in the Old Testament

There is no need to look hard in Genesis, for the story of Adam is the endowment. However, a large corpus of early Adam texts has come forth in which the endowment theme is paramount. A better example to illustrate the pervasive nature of the theme is the case of Noah, which parallels that of Adam in a remarkable way.

The Case of Noah. In Genesis 7:8–9, Noah registered the animals two by two, even as Adam named them. From then on, like Adam (see Moses 3:19–20), Noah lived intimately with the animals (see Genesis 7:16; 8:1). After the flood, Noah found himself in a new world (see Genesis 7:23–8:19), even as Adam did before and after the fall. In this new world, God commanded every form of life to “be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth,” just as in Eden (Genesis 8:17). After the flood, Noah found himself in a lone and desolate world (Genesis 7:23), and, like Adam, proceeded to build an altar, sacrificing every clean beast and fowl (see Genesis 8:20). God accepted the sacrifice and promised that the perennial cycle of life, like the course of the spheres, would continue henceforward (see Genesis 8:21–22). Like Adam’s offspring, Noah’s promptly departed from righteousness, “for the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth; neither will I again smite . . . every thing living” (Genesis 8:21).

After having commanded the creatures to multiply, God gave the same order to Noah that he gave to Adam—to have dominion and be responsible for the felicity of those creatures (see Genesis 9:1–2). Meat was added to Noah’s diet, as grain was to Adam’s (who had been a fruit gatherer in the garden), but only to be used sparingly (see Genesis 9:3–4). There is to be no enmity between man and beast, or between man and man. For just as surely as one man sheds the blood of another, another man will shed his blood (cf. Genesis 9:6). This is not a commandment to avenge blood, but a warning against the cycle of blood and horror, the eternal vendetta with which Satan rules the world. The law of Moses sought to check it by cities of refuge and mandatory cooling-off periods (see Numbers 35:11). The shedding of blood is a mortal offense to the earth itself (see Genesis 9:4–5), for her purpose is to “bring forth abundantly”; and to take life is to reverse the order for which the earth was created (Genesis 9:7; see Moses 7:48). In making this covenant with Noah and his posterity (see Genesis 9:11), God set up a sign (oath), a sign visible in the distance (see Genesis 9:12–17), visible to both parties in the covenant and for the benefit of “every living creature” (Adam’s “every form of life”; Genesis 9:15). For God is considerate of every living creature and of all living flesh that is upon the earth (see Genesis 9:13–17).

Even as Adam’s “sons and daughters . . . began to divide two and two in the land” (Moses 5:3), so the sons of Noah spread across the earth to populate it while Noah, exactly like Adam, takes to gardening (see Genesis 9:20). He celebrated the most ancient of all recorded festivals, the wine feast of intoxication that celebrates the ending of the flood.88 Noah, like Adam, enters his new world clothed with a special garment, which garment enjoys a conspicuous place in the ancient literature. Genesis 9:23 tells us that Shem and Japheth took the garment and both tried it on; then they returned and put it back on Noah, being careful to look away. In a wealth of very old texts, this is identified both as the garment of skins given to Adam upon leaving the garden and the garment which gave him priesthood and kingship over all creatures.89 When Ham wore the garment, the animals, seeing it, did obeisance to him, thinking that his was the same priesthood and kingship as Adam. And thus he deceived them and introduced the false priesthood into the world.

The Case of Jacob. It was at Beth-el, the house of God, that Jacob had his vision, set up his stone circle and altar, and received the promise of progeny that was given to Abraham as well as a title to the promised land; he declared the place to be very special, “none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven” (Genesis 28:17). There he made the covenant that his children thereafter made at the temple, that he would pay a tithe if God would give him this life’s necessities and grant that he return again to the presence of his Father (see Genesis 28:20–22). According to the Zohar, Abraham had been through all this before at the same place, where later Jacob made a covenant with Laban in the same manner: Let us make a covenant between us, properly recorded and notarized (cf. Genesis 31:44). So Jacob took a stone and set it up as a pillar, while his brethren made a stone circle there and had a feast (cf. Genesis 31:45–46). The covenants and bonds were completed: This stone witnesses in the middle between you and me today, says Laban (cf. Genesis 31:48), the middle being that of the circle in which each party claimed a half (see 2 Samuel 2:13–15). “Therefore was the name of it called Galeed” (Gal-ed, the circle of the sign or token; Genesis 31:48). Then Jacob made a sacrifice and held a feast on the mountain, and they spent all night in the camp (see Genesis 31:54)—anticipating Sinai. The next morning Laban went his way, but Jacob had a strange experience—his covenant was no longer to be with a man: Angels were in the place, and when he saw them he said, God’s camp must be here (cf. Genesis 32:1–2). Next comes his wrestling with the Lord, which so perplexed the doctors that they changed the Lord to an angel, but “when one considers that the word conventionally translated as ‘wrestled’ (yēʾāvēq) can just as well mean ‘embrace’ and that it was in this ritual embrace that Jacob received a new name and the bestowal of priestly and kingly power at sunrise (Genesis 32:24–30),”90 the dawn of a new day, there is plainly more here than the doctors perceived.

Jacob represents here the figure of Adam, the primordial man, and “the place where the dream of Jacob occurred is the place where Adam was created—namely, the place of the future Temple and the centre of the earth.”91 “And Jacob called the place Peniel, because I have seen Eloheim face to face and my spirit [nefesh, soul] has been saved [survived].” At that moment, the sun rose as he crossed the water Penuel, limping on his thigh (cf. Genesis 32:30–31).

Later Jacob was instructed to resume operations on the site of the temple (Beth-el), settling there and making an altar to the God who had appeared to him and delivered him from the hand of Esau (see Genesis 35:1). He was to establish a holy society, a little Zion on the spot, instructing all his people to renounce the alien gods, wash themselves and change their garments (see Genesis 35:2). Then they were ready: “Let us arise and go up to the house of the Lord, and there I will make a sacrifice to the God who answered me in the day of my distress” (cf. Genesis 35:3). There seemed to be repetitions of this altar building and sacrificing, always for the same reason—at a place where God had appeared and saved Jacob; the same commandments are given to him as were to Adam and Abraham on like occasions (see Genesis 35:7, 9–12).

According to a study by Alexander Altmann, Jacob actually repeats the entire experience of Adam, being visited by heavenly messengers who instruct him in the ordinances. The sleeping Jacob is “Adam who has forgot his image,” for “in his earthly existence, Jacob, who stands for Man, is sunk into sleep, which means he has become forgetful of his image and counterpart upon the Divine Throne.” The visitation repeats the awakening of the preexistent Adam, “as it were, pushed out from the Chariot of the King. He is asleep here below.”92 This is the sem-sleep of the Egyptian temple rites,93 being pushed from the chariot and being thrust forth from the merkāḇāh, the presence of God or one’s heavenly home.

The Case of Adam. In the noncanonical sources, Adam appears in a very different light from the one who ate the fruit—“whose mortal taste brought death into the world and all our woe.”94 A few passages from a large literature must suffice. A reluctant awakening came in our own generation with the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls, whose purpose is to prepare a community of pious sectaries for the return of “a true temple to Judah and Israel” and to set forth the nature of that temple and the ordinances and covenants that should go with it. The scrolls show us that the scribes and Pharisees had indeed taken over and changed things at Jerusalem. A new Adam emerges in the much older text, leading the Saints to the desert: “For unto you is the wisdom of the Sons of Heaven, to give the perfect way of understanding. For God has chosen them for the eternal covenant, so theirs is all the glory of Adam.”95 “As Adam brought his sacrifice,” according to this tradition, “he put on the vestments of the high priest. . . . In the Holy Writ, it is said, ‘God created man in his image,’ it means [that very] Adam, who was anointed as a high priest, and designated to serve his Maker.”96 “When he [the high priest, Simeon] put on his glorious robes and clothed himself in perfect splendor,” says Ben Sirach, “(then) all flesh hasted together and fell upon their faces to the earth, to worship before the Most High, . . . for his was the glory of Adam.”97 The rabbis, on the other hand, insist that the glorification of Adam was “a tragic mistake,” in spite of such passages as Psalm 8:6 and Ezekiel 28:12–14, which probably arose from Christian “deification of man.”98 It was this Adam of the Jews which appealed to the Christians, who got rid of it when their leaders got the Alexandrian fever. This we see in such transitional works as 2 Enoch, which tells us that when Satan saw Adam in the garden, “He understood that I was going to create another world, because Adam was the Lord of the earth to rule and control it; . . . so he attacked him through Eve and seduced her without further trying to tempt Adam.”99 “On the day that Adam went forth from the garden, he made an offering to the Lord at sunrise, and from that day forth he covered his shame”—this from Jubilees, a book claimed by both Jews and Christians.100

In the earliest Christian writings, Peter discusses the case of Adam with Clement. “You said the first man was a prophet,” says Clement, “but you didn’t say that he was anointed. But if he was not anointed a prophet, he could not have been a prophet, could he?” To this Peter answered, smiling, “If the first man prophesied, it is certain that he was anointed, . . . though the scripture does not tell us about that; . . . what you should have asked is how, being the first man, he could have been anointed with the anointing of Aaron, who in this world was the first to receive the anointing of the special priesthood of Aaron after the pattern of the other anointing. . . . He was a leader of the people and as such a priest and a king [rex primitiarum]. This was a type of other things.” Clement: “Don’t try to fool me, Peter, for, of course, Adam was not anointed with real oil, but with some pure and eternal oil made by God,” etc. Here he falls into the trap that caught all the Christians and Jews thereafter, the obsession with a purely “spiritual” temple. But Peter is not trying to fool him (this is in the playful style of a Platonic dialogue). “And Peter at this appeared indignant: Do you think, Clement, that we can know everything before the time? . . . I can give you the answer, but I shall tell you about these things only when you are ready to hear them!”101 Among the questions thus postponed was how Clement’s dead father and mother were to be saved without having embraced the gospel.

The Case of Enoch. Nothing better illustrates the hostility of the doctors—Jewish and Christian—to the temple and the endowment than the case of Enoch, whose great prominence in the early scriptures was all but effaced by their efforts.102 The Enoch literature has been discovered since the middle of the nineteenth century. A consideration of the name and office of Enoch should suffice to show his intimate ties with the endowment.

It is usual to derive the name of Enoch from the root *á¸¤NK, meaning basically to taste, hence to test, “to give attention to”; from this is derived, in turn, the idea of teaching or training, designating Enoch as “the first vehicle of . . . the genuine gnosis.” A related meaning is “to consecrate,” making Enoch “the consecrated one, from whom authentic solutions [are] to be expected touching the secrets of this world and the world beyond.” This puts the figure of Enoch, André Caquot avers, in the center of a study of matters dealing with initiation in the literature of Israel, notably the Dead Sea Scrolls. Enoch is a great initiate who becomes the great Initiator. He is on another level of existence, and his work is to conduct others there. One study which declares the Hebrew meaning of the root “unknown” suggests the Canaanitish khanaku, “follower” (Gefolgsmann)—that is, in the way of the initiate. The idea was strengthened by “the great role which Enoch plays in Qumran,” with its impressive “prophetic initiation.” The old Hebrew book of Enoch bore the title of Hekhalot, referring to the various chambers or stages of initiation in the temple. Enoch, having reached the final stage, becomes the Metatron to initiate and guide others. “I will not say but what Enoch had Temples and officiated therein,” said Brigham Young, “but we have no account of it.”103 Today we have many such accounts.104

The Case of Abraham. Today Abraham is recognized as a pivotal figure in the ordinances of the temple.105 The theme of Abraham’s life is sacrifice (see D&C 132:49–50), and the motive and reward of the endowment is movingly set forth at the beginning of the Book of Abraham, in which the desire of his life is to bestow blessings upon his fellowmen, even as God bestows them (see Abraham 1:2; Moses 1:39). Some Jewish scholars today attribute to Abraham rather than to Moses the founding of the ordinances of atonement in the temple.

Apostasy and Restoration

The book of 1 Samuel opens with a temple operating on full schedule, but soon the indolent and corrupt priests cause a falling off and people stop coming to the temple. Through direct revelation to Samuel, the endowment is restored, but tension between priest and king continues. Another restoration was in order in the time of Josiah. It began with a great purging from the land of all the alien elements that had filtered into the religion of Israel (see 2 Chronicles 34:3). In the process of renovating the temple, the original book of the law was discovered by the High Priest Hilkiah, and from that it was possible to restore the ordinances in their purity, for the record made it clear that Israel had strayed alarmingly from the path (see 2 Chronicles 34:21). Even so, Abraham, after the falling away of his fathers, was able to make a new beginning, “but the records of the fathers . . . God preserved in mine own hands” (Abraham 1:31). It was not Hilkiah, but Josiah, the king, who took complete charge of the operation, as Saul had attempted, thereby incurring the rebuke of Samuel. But Josiah’s complete command takes us by remarkable transition into a field of study which has proven most fruitful during the past fifty years, a study in which temple rites are central. The subject is “patternism,” and the transition is provided by the Book of Mormon.

Josiah’s name marks him as a sponsor of the “Yahwist” reform of the temple. As the Lachish Letters show, there was much opposition to the movement. Josiah was a contemporary of Lehi, who was also on the side of Yahwists at the time when there were “many prophets” in the land (1 Nephi 1:4), meeting with stiff opposition, as did Lehi himself when he took up the cause. When the Nephites went astray as the Jews had, they were fortunate in having a king who was an ardent student of the scriptures—the brass plates—as was Josiah, and who was determined to maintain the observances of the temple. He named his son and successor Mosiah, thus neatly combining the memory of Josiah with that of the great model he followed, Moses. Lehi followed the Rekhabite example, now so vividly illustrated in the Dead Sea Scrolls, by going out into the desert to preserve the ancient faith and await further revelation; and, shortly after arriving in the New World, Nephi followed the same course, leading his own people away from his apostate brethren into the wilderness, there to build a modest replica of the temple at Jerusalem (see 2 Nephi 5:16). The Rekhabites, as a reward for their faithfulness, were put in charge of the ordinances of the temple (see Jeremiah 35).

King Benjamin not only gathered all the people at the temple for a full-fledged qāhāl (assembly) in the ancient manner, but also to celebrate the great event in the history in any ancient state—a coronation—when the new king would be acclaimed, and the drama of the creation rehearsed to mark the beginning of a new age of the world and a new life cycle of vegetable life; the contest with the powers of darkness would establish the king as the victorious one worthy to rule the new age. There are some thirty-six points in which Mosiah’s coronation followed the pattern of the ancient year-rite or coronation ceremony.106

The remarkable uniformity of the great panegyris (general or national assembly), as celebrated at many ceremonial complexes throughout the world and throughout history,107 suggested a probable single point of origin for the institution. The word patternism, emerging in the 1930s, calls attention to the remarkable uniformity of the institution and has led to various theories explaining it. A common background is now universally conceded; however, many theories are put forth to explain how and where it originated and how it spread.

One of the striking confirmations of Mosiah’s account, which was overlooked in the list noted above, was the erection of a special wooden tower from which the king addressed the people on the subject of divine kingship. Just such a tower and address are described in Nathan the Babylonian’s eyewitness account from the ninth century of the installation of the Exilarch, or ruler of the Jews of the Captivity. Benjamin’s great farewell address and the covenanting and feasting that go with it are a clear anticipation of the greatest celebration of all, when the Nephites met at the temple after the great destruction, there to be instructed and endowed by the Lord in person (see 3 Nephi 11–18). An unfailing episode of the year-rite everywhere was the combat of the king or hero, representing him with the powers of death and darkness, a theme touched on in the Psalms of David. This combat recalls the Lamech story of bloody rivalry for the kingship and dire betrayals, and also supplies the clue to its universality; for with this ritual extravaganza, “their works were abominations, and began to spread among all the sons of men” (Moses 5:52); “and thus the works of darkness began to prevail among all the sons of men” (Moses 5:55). These are the very rites in which Abraham is entangled at the beginning of the Book of Abraham, his own fathers having embraced that perverted version of the endowments. But as if that were not enough, the Prophet Joseph Smith has provided the most enlightening presentation of the drama to be found in literature, and that as early as 1830. Never has man’s condition been set forth with greater economy and power than in the primal drama of “everyman” in the first chapter of the Book of Moses.

After a magnificent prologue in heaven (see Moses 1:1–8), Moses is left on earth to his own resources; and, just as Satan finds Adam cast out of the garden and desperately calling upon God in a dark world, Satan seizes his foul advantage and strikes again when he finds Moses flat on his back in the dark. He introduces himself as the Only Begotten, the rightful ruler; and when Moses challenges and mocks him, a lively stichomythia (“conversation in alternate lines”) ensues, ending when Satan drops all virtuous pretense and launches a frontal attack of such ferocity that Moses is quite overwhelmed and cast down; he knows the bitterness of hell (as the king always does in the year-drama); crying from the depths with his last ounce of strength, he is delivered. Satan is cast out and Moses is again in the presence of God, who formally declares him the victor over many waters (a stock theme in the year-rites), and appoints him the divine king: “For they shall obey thy command as if thou wert God, . . . for thou shalt deliver my people” (Moses 1:25–26).

The Egyptian Heritage

The Egyptian rites in which Abraham found himself involved are richly documented, but no other writing can compare in importance with the Shabako Stone—a text prepared to commemorate the presentation of the endowment on the occasion of the founding of the First Dynasty in Egypt during the reign of Menes. This drama was staged in the temple of Memphis for its dedication and the king’s coronation more than five thousand years ago. “The impact of the Memphite theology was so fundamental,” writes Louis V. Zabkar, that its effect and influence on Egyptian religious thought remained constant until the end of the Egyptian religion. Unparalleled in the history of the ancient Orient as far as its cosmogonic signification is concerned, it traveled from century to century, from one theological system to another; its theme resounds from the first line of Genesis, and from there on through the Old Testament and to the latest period of Hebrew literature, it reaches the pages of the New Testament, witnessing to what extent this conception of the creative power of the Word of God persisted in the ancient Orient, becoming a universal theological theme.108

It begins (cols. 3–4) with the council in heaven at the foundation of the world and proceeds to tell of the choosing of the Only Begotten to inherit and preside; of the rejection of the counterclaims of Seth, who argues priority in age; and of the establishing of the ordinances of the temple, central to which is a baptism representing death and resurrection (cols. 7–19). The center part of the text has been destroyed, but the extensive latter part is a doctrinal treatment of the plan of creation and salvation. All hail the plan of the Most High God presented to the council; he plans and executes as he conceives in his heart and utters with his tongue his plan to be approved by the assembled hosts of the gods and preexistent spirits (cols. 53–54, 57). Every living thing is invested with his divine power, shared by “gods, mortals, beasts, all creeping things and other forms of life” (col. 54). Man is spiritually begotten and physically formed, the future ruler of the earth, endowed with eyes to see, ears to hear, a nose to smell, etc. (col. 56). The earth being prepared with all good things to receive him, a law is given to implement and explain the purpose of the earth as a place of probation: “All who do good will be for eternal life, and all those who do evil for eternal bondage. This law is to be the measure of all things”—it is the purpose of all man’s actions of earth (col. 57). “And God finished his work . . . and was pleased with it” (col. 59). The heavenly plan was then implemented and carried out on earth as messengers came down and men were instructed to build temples where they could rehearse this same creation story at the beginning of each year, and as fields and cities sprang up around these holy centers (cols. 59–61). Then comes the episode of Osiris, who nearly dies but is rescued from the depths at the last moment and revived as the resurrected one. Emerging (like Moses) triumphant over the waters, he proceeds to the veil and beyond “in the footsteps of his father, the Lord of Eternity, to the great throne,” where he is received with happy homecoming and is embraced by the heavenly family; the Ancient of Days takes him into his embrace and conducts him to his throne (cols. 62–64).

One neglected source that richly deserves study and has been widely hailed as the greatest of all dramas is the two Oedipus plays of Sophocles, which the scholars also denounce as amoral and nonsensical, since they simply can’t see the point of any of it. The second play, Oedipus at Colonus, is nothing less than an introduction to the mysteries to which the preceding play is a preparation. On request we would gladly pursue this noble work, but time and place will not allow it here.109

Loss of the Endowment

Man, forever falling short of the fulness of his promise, never completely lives up to the blessings of the endowment. Adam blessed his posterity, said Joseph Smith, because “he wanted to bring them into the presence of God”; likewise “Moses sought to bring the children of Israel into the presence of God, through the power of the Priesthood, but he could not. In the first ages of the world they tried to establish the same thing; and there were Eliases raised up who tried to restore these very glories, but did not obtain them.” For this glory is to be revealed only in “the dispensation of the fullness of times.”110 Apparently the endowment has been more than humanity can handle: “If the Church knew all the commandments, one-half they would condemn through prejudice and ignorance.”111

The Perplexity of the Jews

The rabbis, who hold no priesthood but only certificates of learning, have always had an ambivalent attitude toward the temple. They cannot but echo the reverence and yearning of the prophets for it, yet the idea of the return of a real temple repels them as both dangerous and naive. Erwin Goodenough has found that among the Jews of the Graeco-Roman world “have survived a great number of archaeological remains covered with pagan symbols which quite amaze one familiar with the accepted traditions of Judaism.” The rabbis like that as little as they do the disclosures of the Dead Sea Scrolls, and “no attempt has yet been made to analyze the material to see what sort of Judaism could have produced them.”112 Jacob Neusner has expressed the embarrassment of the rabbis in a study in which he reports that “in the case of early Rabbinic Judaism, . . . we have a considerable corpus of laws which prescribe the way things are done but make no effort to interpret what is done. These constitute ritual entirely lacking in mythic, let alone theological, explanation.”113 That is, no explanation whatever is offered for the ancient temple ordinances.

Though fully one-third of the Mishnah is taken up with temple ordinances, none of the rabbis who wrote it (third century B.C. to third century a.d.) ever participated in such a ritual. For them the acts performed in the temple “bore no more concrete relevance to everyday life than did the cultic laws”; they spent their days in a “most serious effort . . . to create a corpus of laws to describe a ritual life which did not exist.”114 “The ritual [itself] is myth,” Neusner insists, “in the sense that it was not real, was not carried out”; therefore “the explanation of the ritual . . . is skipped. . . . We deal with laws made by people who never saw or performed the ritual described by those laws.”115 Neusner gives as an example the imitation killing of the red cow as if it were in the temple; in this ordinance, “the effort is [made] to replicate the Temple’s cult in every possible regard.”116 It is performed on the Mount of Olives facing the temple, so that everything that is done is a mirror image of the real thing with the right and left hands reversed. In the real temple, the priest, girt up with his robe, “slaughtered with his right hand, and received the blood in his left.”117 “The sprinkling of the blood . . . [thus] accomplishes atonement, or kapporah.”118 The hand is held in such a manner as to hold the blood, as it holds the oil in the anointing (fig. 9).

While everything is thought of as “converging upon, and emanating from, the Temple,” it is now only “metaphysical reality; . . . the rabbis think about transcendent issues primarily through rite and form.”119 Likewise, “what people are told to do is what they are supposed to think”—think of themselves as performing the rite, but never trying to interpret it.120 The teachers of an early day explained that in the temple, “attentiveness leads to ritual cleansing,” which leads in turn to washing and anointing, which leads to holiness, hence to humility, hence to fear of sin, hence to piety, hence to the Holy Spirit, and finally to the resurrection of the dead, which culminates in the figure of Elijah. What does all this pointing to the resurrection and to Elijah have to do with the temple? Nothing at all, says Neusner, but such a sequence may suggest significant connections to a Latter-day Saint.

Figure 9. The “golden spoons” of Exodus 25:29 were used to burn incense. They frequently took the form of a cupped hand, such as this Egyptian example (A) of Beni Hasan (c. 1100 B.C.), and this Semitic example (B) from Megiddo.

The Temple Scroll

The newly discovered Temple Scroll, one of the Dead Sea Scrolls, has focused the attention of the Jews on the temple from new and unfamiliar angles. Jacob Milgrom, who like Neusner has visited Brigham Young University from time to time, has studied this scroll exhaustively. He informs us that, according to its authors, “the entire Scroll was the speech of God.”121 It begins with the covenant with Moses on Mount Sinai, which is where the children of Israel are introduced to the endowment; “the Scroll affirms that a Temple must exist in the land (Exodus 25:8–9) and that its blueprint . . . was known to David.”122 Understandably, this is an embarrassment to the Jews of present-day Israel—what about the temple now? The Temple Scroll points out that the temple is placed on earth at various levels of perfection: The First House was not the Second House or, of course, “the messianic Temple which God Himself will build on ‘the Day of Blessing.’”123 But in all temples at all times, the ordinances remain ever the same, though with the growing perfection of the Saints, features may be added, such as “the cherubimkapporet, the Urim and Thummim, and the participation of the twelve tribes” in the temple of the last days.124 Another change in the temple of the last days is the tendency to extend the priestly regimen to the entire people, so that they too become holy, each a priest (cf. Exodus 19:6). Naturally, the rabbis regard the shedding of blood as permanently done away with and attribute the lack of blood sacrifice in Christianity to the following of the Jewish tradition.125

The Christian Endowment and Its Loss

The restoration of the gospel in the meridian of times centered wholly around the temple and endowment. As reported in the Gospel of Luke 1:5–6, it begins with a righteous priest and his wife, both direct descendants of Aaron, “walking scrupulously (amemptoi) in all the commandments and fulfillment of the covenants (dikaiomasis) of the Lord” (author’s translation). The language is right out of the Dead Sea Scrolls, where we also find righteous priestly families living the law in its purity and awaiting further revelation. An angel from on high breaks the long, long silence of four hundred years when he appears to the priest while he is ministering at the altar before the Holy of Holies and tells him that he has come in answer to prayer—just as the angel appeared to Adam at the altar—and that his message is all one of joy and rejoicing. The priest’s son will be filled with the Holy Ghost and turn much of Israel back again “to the Lord their God” (Luke 1:16)—it was a restoration of the gospel. The child is coming in the spirit of Elijah to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children “and the minds of those who did not believe to righteousness” and, in so doing, to “prepare for the Lord a people properly endowed (supplied, equipped)” (Luke 1:17, author’s translation). But the fathers and those who did not believe (note the significant use of the past tense), the disobedient spirits of old, are all dead. How can the expected prophet bring a great light “to those who sit in darkness” (D&C 57:10)? How indeed! His office is to baptize, from which certain conclusions are obvious. Zacharias, the priest, was baffled and asked for a sign in the nature of a challenge: “How shall I know that this is so?” (Luke 1:18, author’s translation). In answer to this, the angel identifies himself by name and explains his mission: “I have come to preach the gospel to you” (cf. Luke 1:19). He gives him a sign—to be struck dumb until a certain time because he did not take the words of the angel seriously.

Today, Roman Catholic scholars see in Matthew 16:18–19 a reference to the temple. It would appear now that the gates of “hell prevailing” has nothing to do with the forces of evil attacking the Church; the express statement is that “the gates of hades will not hold back those who belong to it,” for the object [autēs] is in the genitive and the antecedent is the Church. Those who belong to the Church cannot be held back. Why so? Because Peter has the keys to the work that will release them—he is authorized to open the gate (see Matthew 16:19). That this deals, as is now recognized, with the mysteries is clear from the next verse, in which the disciples are commanded not to make a word of this known to the world, while from that time on, Jesus Christ (the name appeared in the preceding verse in full for the first time) began to show his disciples how he would be totally rejected by the temple authorities—elders, high priests, and scribes— and be put to death (see Matthew 16:21). When Peter protests and says this is going too far, the Lord rebukes him sharply for taking seriously the things of men rather than the things of God. We are now on a wholly different level.

A theme that runs all through the Gospel of John is the absolute refusal of the Jewish people and their leaders to take literally what Jesus tells them. It is customary to view John as the most “spiritual,” philosophical, allegorical, and mystical book of the New Testament. Yet allegory and abstraction were the breath of life to the schools of the day; if Christ’s teachings were of that nature, no one would have been in the least offended, yet in no other Gospel are the Lord’s hearers so puzzled, baffled, offended, and angered as in the Gospel of John. What kind of a “Great Teacher” is this, who constantly perplexes and enrages his students? “From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him” (John 6:66). For neither did his brethren believe in him (see John 7:5). “Then said the Jews among themselves, . . . what manner of saying is this that he said?” (John 7:35–36). “Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees ever believed on him?” (John 7:48). “Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father the devil” (John 8:43–44). “This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them” (John 10:6). “And many of them said, He hath a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him?” (John 10:20). Plainly, he was speaking of things which neither the schoolmen of the times, nor the later schoolmen who produced conventional Christian theology, wanted to understand. In his last days with the disciples and his appearances after the resurrection, he taught them the mysteries of the endowment. The last supper was at the Passover, and Jesus associated his doings there with the rites of the temple. “Since I am going to prepare a place for you,” he told the disciples, “it is proper for me to tell you about it. In my Father’s house [the temple] are many monai [places where one stops on passing through, the hekhalot of the temple or chambers of the temple]. And having prepared a place for you, I will come back and be your paralemptor [the technical term for one who guides one through the mysteries], so that you can be where I am, you know the path I am taking” (cf. John 14:2–4). To this Thomas said, “No, we don’t know!” (cf. John 14:5). “I am the way, the truth, and the life. You will not get to the Father any other way” (cf. John 14:6)—that is, other than through the Son.

A large literature, beginning with Acts and including the many Coptic and Hebrew discoveries of recent years, reports that the Lord did return and for forty days instructed the disciples in the doctrine and in the ordinances, conspicuous among which was baptism for the dead.126 Though the death of Jesus Christ ended sacrifice by the shedding of blood, the Christians were, if anything, more attached to the temple than the Jews.127 What kind of a temple was it without a shedding of blood? The epistle to the Hebrews explains that Christ became a “merciful and faithful high priest . . . to make reconciliation for the sins of the people” (Hebrews 2:17). He was “faithful . . . as also Moses was faithful” (Hebrews 3:2). “Seeing then that we have as great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast the things we have agreed to [or covenants we have taken—homologias]” (Hebrews 4:14, author’s translation). Every high priest offers sacrifices for sins, and no man taketh this honor upon himself save he were called of God, as was Aaron (see Hebrews 5:1, 4), but Christ is “a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedec” (Hebrews 5:6). For as the Son learned obedience, he is to be obeyed (see Hebrews 5:8–9). Paul recognizes that these things are “very hard to teach because you are dull of hearing” (cf. Hebrews 5:11). He mentions baptisms, laying on of hands, resurrection of the dead, and judgment, which are initiatory rites (see Hebrews 6:2). He mentions the supreme penalty: “for crucifying for yourself the Son of God and putting him to open shame” (Hebrews 6:6, author’s translation), referring to the public divulgence of sacred things. Armed with hope, the soul is that “which entereth into that [which is] within the veil,” where Jesus, “an High Priest after the order of Melchizedec” is our prodromos (Hebrews 6:19–20). Paul is particularly concerned with making clear to the Jewish converts that there is no real conflict between the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods. The lower priesthood is naturally succeeded by the higher one, the important difference being that the priest himself enters no horkomosia (“covenant”), while the higher priesthood is “with a making of covenants” to be a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek; this was “a diathēkē, covenant” (see Hebrews 7:20–22). This is a high priest made “higher than the heavens” (Hebrews 7:26). Though the “carnal ordinances” lasted only until the time of reformation (see Hebrews 9:10–13), yet the New Testament also requires the shedding of blood, “but where there is a testament, the one making it must necessarily be responsible unto death” (Hebrews 9:16, author’s translation). “Almost all things are by the law purged [cleansed] with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission” (Hebrews 9:22). “Having . . . [the] boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus” (Hebrews 10:19), we pass “through the veil, that is to say, his flesh; . . . having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water” (Hebrews 10:20, 22). Naturally the theologians have said that this is a passage from a carnal to a purely spiritual order of things, but nothing in Christian tradition nor, in fact, down to the present time is more indisputable than that it was real blood and real water that were required for sanctification by the new covenant, just as the old was real blood and real water. This has always been an embarrassment to the churchmen.

The Gnostics

Because of the endowment, the Latter-day Saints have been labeled Gnostics by ministers who have little knowledge of the term. The so-called Gnostics are always distinguished in the early days from those possessing the real gnosis—mentioned twenty-seven times in the New Testament. The gnosis was that special “knowledge” which the Lord imparted to the disciples in their secret session. With the death of the last apostle, according to the earliest church historian, Hegesippus, when no one was left who could call them to account, a swarm of pretenders suddenly appeared on the scene, each claiming that he had the true gnosis, especially the ordinances, imparted by the Lord to his disciples after the resurrection.

The Gnostics could get away with that because the church no longer had knowledge of those things. In his great work the First Principles, Origen confesses that the church no longer has answers to the terrible questions, nor can one find in the scriptures any account of how such ordinances as baptism, sacrament, and marriage should be performed. Irenaeus, St. Augustine, and a host of others confirm his admission. The Gnostics enjoyed a brief but sensational advantage until the obvious inadequacy of their claims became apparent. Valentinius, one of the first and most important, got a huge following because he claimed that he could tell “what we were, what we became; where we were, whither we have been

cast; whither we hasten, whence we are delivered; what birth is, what rebirth is.”128

But the Gnostics could only answer the great questions by dematerializing everything, as is clear from Papyrus Bodmer LX. Geo Widengren says that the prime teaching of Gnosticism was that “the origin of the material world . . . [was] a result of activity of the evil power”129 and “that matter is evil in and of itself; . . . the spiritual, . . . as such is divine.”130 This is exactly what the later church taught. The appeal of the Gnostics lay in their exploitation of traditions and rumors from the early Church dealing with ordinances. Those teachings and practices which the many Gnostic sects (Epiphanius lists eighty-eight of them) had in common can reasonably be taken as copies of a true original. Just so, the Egyptian ordinances of Pharaoh (which were in fact the main inspiration of the Gnostics) were earnest imitations of the real thing and may give us a very good idea of what the original was like. So the main practices of the Gnostics retain clear echoes of the endowment.

These, according to Widengren, are the soul’s progress toward a heavenly home in which it must pass gates and challenges, but enjoys the help of a holy guide. The spirit is going back to his home where his throne, garment, crown (or wreath), and court all await him.131 To all this light and glory is placed the opposition of Ahriman, of darkness and death, for an evil power created this physical world. There is one sent from heaven to rescue us from the prison of the world, the Savior, often identified with the Primal Man. The poem The Pearl brings these ideas together.132 Typical is the Coptic Apocryphon of John: “Through the establishment of the perfect Temple [what the Qumran people were also looking for] Adam can return to God”; also, we learn that Jesus Christ brought all the signs which he taught the Apostles “from the Father out of the House of the Living.”133 Coptic writings such as 1 Jeu and 2 Jeu are particularly concerned with signs revealed in the temple in the process of preparing one for the next world. In the Gospel of Philip, the three levels of the temple represent three degrees of holiness. Baptism is the holy place, but the Holy of Holies is higher; the former signifies resurrection, but the latter is the marriage covenant, which goes beyond.134 A time will come when the temple work will be universal;135 meantime, the rending of the veil signified that the ordinances were now open to all and that no worthy one would be held back.136

There are two main centers of Gnostic teaching, the Iranian and the Syro-Egyptian, but in the end it all goes back to the popular traditions of Iran, Widengren concludes,137 and from it we get the Buddha, Mani, the Imam, the Manichaeans, Bogomils, Cathari, Baptists, Rosicrucians, Bohemists, Masons, Swedenborgians, and others. It is plain that the Gnostic impostors picked up much of their material from the mysteries, and though the subject has been endlessly debated, the question “How do the mystery cults relate to the Gnostics?” remains to this day unanswered “because there is no generally accepted concept of the Gnosis, while the fundamental features of the Mysteries are also debated.”138 Martin P. Nilsson thought that Orphism was about as far back as one could trace the mysteries:

Orphism is the combination and the crown of the manifold religious movements of the archaic period. The development of the cosmogony in a speculative direction, with the addition of an anthropogony which laid the principal emphasis on the explanation of the mixture of good and evil in human nature; the legalism of ritual and life; the mysticism of cult and doctrine; the development of the other life into concrete visibility, and the transformation of the lower world into a place of punishment by the adaptation of the demand for retribution to the old idea that the hereafter is repetition of the present; the belief in the happier lot of the purified and initiated;—for all these things parallels, or at least suggestions, can be found in other quarters. The greatness of Orphism lies in having combined all this into a system, and in the incontestable originality which made the individual in his relationship to guilt and retribution the centre of its teaching.139

Hermeticism

Hermeticism was the doctrine that all the wisdom in the world was originally put into the thirty-six books of Thoth or Hermes (see fig 10).140 The rites were based on these books, and the priest who conducted the Egyptian endowment had to know at least six books of Thoth by heart, those explaining the seals and the sacrifices.141 Clement of Alexandria, in the most instructive work on the mysteries, calls the well-known Egyptian Book of the Dead “hermetic” and attributes it to Thoth.142

Figure 10. The ibis-headed Thoth, as god of writing, records the passage of years on the notched palm rib, the hieroglyph for a year, as also shown three times above him in the upper right corner. The palm rib rests on a young tailed frog, which crouches on the shen-sign of eternity. These three symbols together refer to vast numbers of years—like the seemingly innumerable tadpoles in a pool of water.

The idea of an “archaic wisdom,” prisca arcane, or “primeval revelation,” a knowledge of the ancients far in advance of later times, has always intrigued philosophers and theologians. But today it is the scientists who are taking it seriously. Joseph Smith was well acquainted with the idea: “From time to time these glad tidings were sounded in the ears of men in different ages; . . . certainly God spoke to [Abel], . . . and if He did, would He not . . . deliver to him the whole plan of the Gospel? . . . And . . . was he not taught also of His ordinances? . . . For our own part we cannot believe that the ancients in all ages were so ignorant of the system of heaven as many suppose.”143 It is interesting that, at the very time Joseph Smith was preparing the things of the endowment, he was most deeply interested in his Egyptian studies.144 The field of hermetic writings is immense, and the instructions to which it has given rise are almost without number.

Asking Too Much?

The endowment, charged with meaning at every step, demands the closest attention and a brain and intellect that are clear and active. How easily it overloads the circuits as the tired mind takes refuge in dreamland! A School of the Prophets was necessary to prepare the Brethren for their endowments in the first place,145 and the leaders began to understand only when the veil was taken from their minds. The eyes of their understandings were opened. Brain, intellect, mind, eyes, understanding—it is a strenuous intellectual exercise from first to last. “I advise all,” said the Prophet, “to go on to perfection and search deeper and deeper into the mysteries of Godliness.”146 As for himself, “It has always been my province to dig up hidden mysteries, new things, for my hearers.”147 How much easier to relax and fall into a routine increasingly geared to efficiency and the reduction of time and effort.

When we enter the temple, we leave one world and step into another. Conversely, when we leave the temple, we leave one world, sometimes with a sigh of relief, and return to the other. If the Latter-day Saints are going to continue building temples, they must make up their minds as to which world they are going to live in. It should not be hard to decide if only we are willing.

Which Is the Real World?

We are about to learn that we have had it backwards. We do not need the temple experience to tell us what all sages, poets, saints, and everybody else have always known—namely, that this world is “weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable,” a vale of tears, etc.;148 and all because everything in it is irrevocably headed for oblivion, as everyone finds out sooner or later. It is an outrage, but everybody accepts it because they have no other choice; but the Latter-day Saints do have another choice, and they may not evade it. Our present version of “the World” is particularly unreal. At present, the most discussed book on the condition of America today is Robert Bellah’s Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American Life.149 Bellah and his wife gave some enlightening talks at Brigham Young University some years ago and appreciate our position better than most. Bellah’s book has a number of contributors and is based on interviews with hundreds of Americans. It shows an almost complete absence of “transcendent purpose” in their lives: the enlightened minority differ from the bemused majority only in that “all of them would like to find some meaning to life beyond the next promotion or home improvement.” The Harvard sociologist Daniel Bell concludes that only religion can relieve the devastation of this “hedonistic consumerist civilization.” “From the boardroom to the bedroom, strategy, technique, self-seeking and the notion of strict contractual obligation have supplanted decency and intimacy, respectively.” An admired writer of our time, Raymond Carver, “distills a bleak vacuity, . . . a sense of something—structure, meaning, purpose—missing.” The contributors find only “deepening circles of desolation inscribed by our individualism, . . . our incorrigible self-centeredness.” “We have lost our balance,” writes one reviewer, “scuttled our cultural traditions that used to offset our individualism; community has atrophied among us and the self grown cancerous.” “We do not argue with one another, we do not even share a discourse.”

And that is the real world? Historically, a strong dose of temple work is the only thing to cure that myopia. Joseph Smith understood perfectly and described vividly the situation in his day in the great epistle to the Elders in Kirtland, emphasizing the immense gap between the two orders of existence:

Consider for a moment, brethren, the fulfillment of the words of the prophet; for we behold that darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the inhabitants thereof—that crimes of every description are increasing among men—vices of great enormity are practiced— the rising generation growing up in the fullness of pride and arrogance—the aged losing every sense of conviction, and seemingly banishing every thought of a day of retribution—the intemperance, immorality, extravagance, pride, blindness of heart, idolatry, the loss of natural affection; the love of this world, and indifference toward the things of eternity increasing among those who profess a belief in the religion of heaven, and infidelity spreading itself in consequence of the same—men giving themselves up to commit acts of the foulest kind, and deeds of the blackest dye, blaspheming, defrauding, blasting the reputation of neighbors, stealing, robbing, murdering; advocating error and opposing the truth, forsaking the covenant of heaven, and denying the faith of Jesus—and in the midst of all this, the day of the Lord fast approaching when none except those who have won the wedding garment will be permitted to eat and drink in the presence of the Bridegroom, the Prince of Peace!150

What a picture he gives of those idyllic faraway times of our national innocence! “The inhumanity and murderous disposition of this people! It shocks all nature; it beggars and defies all description; . . . too much for human beings; it cannot be found among the heathens. . . . It cannot be found among the savages of the wilderness.”151

What is more, he knows that things are only going to get worse;152 back in 1835, he announced that “the Lord declared to His servants, some eighteen months since, that He was then withdrawing His Spirit from the earth; and we can see that such is the fact. . . . The governments of the earth are thrown into confusion and division; and Destruction, to the eye of the spiritual beholder, seems to be written by the finger of an invisible hand, in large capitals, upon almost every thing we behold.”153 The extremists take over154 and the ambitious corporations prevail—for even they are not forgotten in the prophecies.155 When “the whole earth groans,” who is to be trusted in such a world? “The world always mistook false prophets for true ones,” said Joseph;156 and he noted that loyalty oaths and protestations are actually signals of desperation and mistrust.157 There is no help in politics: “My feelings revolt at . . . having anything to do with politics.”158 In the end, any solution given “without revelation, without commandment, . . . would prove a curse.”159

“A man’s character is his fate,” said Heraclitus—the tragedy is not what becomes of us, but what we become. Four major steps to success in public life today are things which Joseph Smith insists no one should ever indulge in under any circumstances—namely, to (1) aspire, (2) accuse, (3) contend, and (4) coerce. It is striking how these very operations are brought into perspective in the person of Satan, who aspires (that was his undoing, according to Joseph Smith), who accuses (devil; Greek diabolos and Hebrew satan both mean “accuser”)—he becomes an “accuser of his brethren” as he charges his heavenly visitors with trying to rob him of his kingdom and greatness. He contends even with the Lord, and even in the garden; indeed, “the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil” (3 Nephi 11:29). As to coercion, his trump card is to buy up military might and rule the earth with shocking violence.

An Urgent Call

The Prophet foresees the total collapse of world order,160 with a sore vexing of the nations,161 as “the adversary spreadeth his dominions, and darkness reigneth; and the anger of God kindleth against the inhabitants of the earth; and none doeth good, for all have gone out of the way” (D&C 82:5–6). The Old Testament ends with the best-known passage of scripture about the endowment (Malachi 4:5–6) and on a note of grim foreboding: “Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments” (i.e., covenants, terms of endowment; Malachi 4:4). These are to be revived at a time of great crises: “Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse” (Malachi 4:5–6). By the report that Elijah has already come, we now “may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors.”162 Therein is also hope, for Elijah’s coming makes it possible to forestall the curse: How shall God rescue you in this generation? By sending the Prophet Elijah.163 To those who received their endowments to go forth into the world he said, “The destroying angel will follow close at your heels and . . . destroy the works of iniquity, while the saints will be gathered.”164 “The keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors” (D&C 110:16).

Is the presence of the temple in our midst a guarantee of safety? How often have the Jews made that mistake! For the greater the blessing promised, the greater the penalty and the risk. It was expressly of the endowment that the Lord said, “Of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation. Ye call upon my name for revelations,” but in not heeding them “ye become transgressors; and justice and judgment are the penalty . . . unto my law. . . . When ye do not what I say, ye have no promise” (D&C 82:3–4, 10). God was not pleased with the many Latter-day Saints who had “treated lightly His commands.”165 The discernment of spirits was of primary importance among the gifts and powers of the priesthood precisely because false spirits have been frequently found among the Latter-day Saints.166 It was failure to live up to covenants made in the temple that got the Saints driven from Kirtland, Missouri, and Nauvoo, as Brigham Young pointedly observed. A week before the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum, Brigham wrote, “I preached in the Temple in the morning, and brother F. D. Richards in the afternoon. . . . The Saints were dead and cold to the things of God.”167

What is the result of failing to live up to our covenants? It is to be under Satan’s influence; there is no other alternative, for you cannot “serve two masters” (Matthew 6:24). With the first slip, the sinner begins to put distance between himself and God. Satan instantly took advantage of Adam and Eve’s delinquency to alienate them from God. It was he who excitedly called attention to their guilt and urged them to make coverings of fig leaves and to hide themselves. It was not to stir them to repentance, but to urge them to try a cover-up, hiding from God and thereby estranging themselves from him. It was the Lord who sought them out and spoiled Satan’s game by offering and commanding perpetual repentance. Even so, one who fails to live up to his covenants tries to hide first by looking for loopholes in the language of the endowment. Brigham Young has commented on the futility and hypocrisy of this procedure; there is no way, he observes, by which one can possibly misunderstand or wrest the language of the covenants, no matter how determined one is to do it. We can rationalize with great zeal—and that is the next step—but never escape from our defensive position. Many have noted the strong tendency of Latter-day Saints to avoid making waves. They seem strangely touchy on controversial issues. This begets an extreme lack of candor among the Saints, which in turn is supported by a new doctrine, according to which we have a prophet at our head who relieves us of all responsibility for seeking knowledge beyond a certain point, making decisions, or taking action on our own.

Adam did well to obey, but he was not to be guided through obedience alone, and heavenly teachers came to explain things to him and to discuss them with him, even as all the patriarchs, prophets, apostles, and people of Israel are invited by the Lord to come and reason with him. One way of seeking immunity from guilty feelings is to take the offensive behind the sanction in extreme conservatism, which is supposed to place one’s loyalty beyond suspicion, while one piously denounces others.

Back to the Present World

Those who would discover “what has made this country great” must necessarily appeal to history. But even in the most extensive studies, such as Bellah’s, the history examined is both brief and local, all too short and limited to get to the root of the problem. The one solid core of American culture is the Bible, and the theme there is “What will make Israel great?” The answer is written in every chapter of the Old Testament. The Israelites were to understand that this was not to be viewed as mere tradition or custom. You and each of you are entering upon a solemn covenant this day, here and now: “The Lord has not (only) made this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here and alive this day” (Deuteronomy 5:3, author’s translation). Merely to acknowledge and agree to it is not enough. “O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them, with their children for ever!” (Deuteronomy 5:29). Every hour of the day, the covenant (endowment) makes demands upon the individual; it is never out of his mind, especially the first great commandment: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart” (Deuteronomy 6:5–6). And there is to be no cheating; you may not deviate to the right or left (see Deuteronomy 28:14). To hedge, however slightly, in fulfilling obligations under the covenant is an abomination; the one crime God will not tolerate is meanness of spirit (see Deuteronomy 17:1).

But it is worth it. If the people “observe . . . to do all his commandments, . . . the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth”; his people will be overwhelmed with blessings in every possible aspect of life (cf. Deuteronomy 28:1–6). “Your enemies that rise up against you shall be smitten and scattered” (Deuteronomy 28:7), “and your prosperity will be boundless” (cf. Deuteronomy 28:11). But “if you will not hearken,” curses await you exactly matching the blessings, all in reverse (Deuteronomy 28:15, author’s translation and emphasis added); and these curses will dog you in all your undertakings “until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly” (Deuteronomy 28:20).

As Moses presents the propositions to them one by one to be received by covenant, after each one is given, “All the people shall say, Amen!” (Deuteronomy 27:14–26). And what will they be cursed for? Graven images, holding parents in contempt, removing a neighbor’s landmark, taking advantage of a blind person or of strangers, orphans, or widows in court; incest and sexual perversions; striking a neighbor off guard; taking or giving a fee for killing; and finally, “Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them. And all the people shall say, Amen” (Deuteronomy 27:26, emphasis added).

President Kimball, on a great and solemn occasion (the United States Bicentennial), declared himself “appalled and frightened” by the delinquency of the people in keeping just such laws of fairness and justness. He pointed to three grave derelictions: (1) the contempt for the environment, (2) the rule of money, and (3) trust in military might.168

And here is another list to match these pervasive evils. Both the older and the younger Nephi list four things that will bring a church or civilization to destruction: “All churches which are built up [1] to get gain, . . . [2] to get power over the flesh, . . . [3] to become popular in the eyes of the world, . . . [4] who seek the lusts of the flesh, . . . must be consumed as stubble” (1 Nephi 22:23). The younger Nephi is just as explicit: “Now the cause of this iniquity of the people was this—Satan had great power, . . . tempting them to seek for [1] power, and [2] authority, and [3] riches, and [4] the vain things of the world” (3 Nephi 6:15). Note that authority and popularity are interchangeable in the two lists, as they should be, for in our world in which the image is all, they are virtually indistinguishable. Need we note that these four vices are the things that spell success today, making “lives of the rich and famous” increasingly the envy and ideal of young and old?

Consecration, the Great Stumbling Block

It will be noted that almost all the crimes listed in Moses’ catalogue are those of a mean-spirited nature, and this brings us to the acid test of the law of consecration. This embodies the one quality devoid of all meanness, the only thing, Moroni tells us, which can save a people from destruction by making them worthy of saving, and that is charity (see Ether 12:33–37). The gifts and promises dealing with the law of consecration are the center of world history. It is the “hierocentric principle.” As far back as the record goes, the temple has been the center of world history, the heart and soul of every great nation and civilization, for good or evil. Ours is for good: “We have the revelation of Jesus, and the knowledge within us is sufficient to organize a righteous government upon the earth, and to give universal peace to all mankind.”169 But nowhere else will you find it. What could demand a greatness of soul, a generous hand, and a magnanimous heart more than this one instrument of salvation? Today, many declare with the poet Yeats, “Things fall apart, the centre cannot hold; Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world.”170 That center, the only one of proven permanence, is the covenant of Israel to which our ancestors looked for strength before its restoration in its fulness.

It was when the Saints balked at keeping the law of consecration that the Lord said, “I, the Lord, am not to be mocked in these things. . . . Organize yourselves and appoint every man his stewardship . . . over earthly blessings, which I have made and prepared for my creatures [that means they must be shared!]” (D&C 104:6, 11, 13). “And it is my purpose to provide for my saints, for all things are mine. But it must needs be done in my own way; and behold this is the way that I, the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be exalted, in that the rich are made low” (D&C 104:15–16). Can there be any doubt that that last was meant to be jarring? It would be hard to find a declaration less calculated to soothe and delight the success-oriented person of today. Admittedly, one living by the law of consecration would be hopelessly out of place in our competitive and acquisitive society. But in the same way that a healthy person would be out of place in an isolation ward or asylum, an honest person would be out of place in a casino or jail, or a chaste person out of place at a sex orgy or porno festival. Should we recommend that they all adjust to their surroundings and not make waves?

“The ordinances must be kept in the very way God has appointed; otherwise their Priesthood will prove a curse instead of a blessing.”171 There is no margin for rationalization or manipulation: “The moment we revolt at anything which comes from God the Devil takes power.”172 One who wants it both ways, as Brigham Young said, must suffer the most excruciating torture on this earth.173 Because of the basic contradiction, his plans go constantly awry, his projects fizzle, his big idea leads nowhere; no longer does his confidence wax strong in the presence of God.

But can one expect the impossible of ordinary people— to deny the world they live in? We do it every time we proclaim the truth of the first vision. We used to sing a sentimental song about the first vision, and then go home to Sunday dinner, back to the comfortable real world. But as Brigham Young kept reminding the Saints, the real world is Zion, the only enduring order of things, the Order of Enoch.174 The Saints stubbornly refused to see it.175 For that they were driven from Missouri, where they were to build the great temple of the last days,176 and continued to be driven from Nauvoo; the Elders did not want to hear of it.177 Today, as in Brigham’s day, we focus our attention on the overthrow of the wicked rather than the sanctification of ourselves: “Do not be too anxious for the Lord to hasten his work. Let our anxiety be centered upon one thing, the sanctification of our own hearts, the purifying of our own affections.”178

Notes

^1. Clementine Recognitions 1.1, in PG 1:1207. Cf. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Terrible Questions,” in Temple and Cosmos, CWHN 12 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS), 336–78.

^2. Clementine Recognitions 1.24 and 28, in PG 1:1220, 1222.

^3. Ibid., 1.52, in PG 1:1236; cf. Hugh W. Nibley, “Baptism for the Dead in Ancient Times,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1987), 103–4.

^4. John G. Taylor, Black Holes (New York: Avon, 1973), 187–88.

^5. C. P. Snow, Variety of Men (New York: Scribner’s, 1966), 14.

^6. Webster’s New International Dictionary, 3rd ed., s.v. “endowment.”

^7. Journal of Discourses, 2:31.

^8. Ibid., 19:251.

^9. The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), 71, 82.

^10. The Words of Joseph Smith—The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph, ed. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Orem, UT: Grandin, 1992), 214.

^11. Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 183.

^12. Words of Joseph Smith, 131.

^13. Ibid., 212–13.

^14. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 237; cf. History of the Church, 5:1–2 (4 May 1842).

^15. Words of Joseph Smith, 303; cf. D&C 110:12.

^16. Words of Joseph Smith, 304.

^17. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 168.

^18. Ibid., 237.

^19. Genesis 14:27–28 JST.

^20. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 264.

^21. Ibid., 274.

^22. Words of Joseph Smith, 245.

^23. See Shaye J. D. Cohen, “The Temple and the Synagogue,” in The Temple in Antiquity: Ancient Records and Modern Perspectives, ed. Truman G. Madsen (Provo, UT: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1984), 154.

^24. Deseret News, 2 May 1877, 201.

^25. Hugh W. Nibley, “What Is a Temple,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:355–90.

^26. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 196.

^27. Words of Joseph Smith, 85.

^28. Jonathan Z. Smith, “The Garments of Shame,” History of Religions 5/2 (1966): 217–38.

^29. Cf. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Expanding Gospel,” in Temple and Cosmos, CWHN 12:177–211.

^30. Hugh W. Nibley, The Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri: An Egyptian Endowment, 2nd ed., CWHN 16 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 2005), 472, 479–80, 487–89, 506–8.

^31. Eric Chaisson, “The Broadest View of the Biggest Picture,” Harvard Magazine 84 (January–February 1982): 21–25.

^32. Kenneth Weaver, “Meteorites: Invaders from Space,” National Geographic 170 (September 1986): 390–418.

^33. Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1961): 2:69–71.

^34. Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 5 (original spelling retained).

^35. Ibid.

^36. Ibid., 6; cf. Milton Backman, The First Vision (Salt Lake City: Book-craft, 1980), 156.

^37. Cf. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Meaning of the Atonement,” in Approaching Zion, CWHN 9 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1989), 554–614; and Hugh W. Nibley, “The Sacrifice of Isaac,” in Abraham in Egypt, 2nd ed., CWHN 14 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 2000), 319–42.

^38. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 322.

^39. Cf. John W. Welch, The Sermon at the Temple and the Sermon on the Mount (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1990), 70–72, 103–4.

^40. Cf. Nibley, “Baptism for the Dead,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:109–13.

^41. The Works of Rabelais, book V, chapters XXXIV–XLVII, 616–39.

^42. See Nibley, Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, CWHN 16:174.

^43. Discourse on Abbatôn, 1a–b, 4a–6a, 9a–13b, in E. A. W. Budge, Coptic Martyrdoms, etc., in the Dialect of Upper Egypt (London: British Museum, 1914; reprint, New York: AMS, 1977), 225–26, 228–29, 231–35, 474–75, 477–78, 480–83.

^44. Discourse on Abbatôn, 14a–b, in Budge, Coptic Martyrdoms, 235, 483–84.

^45. Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed., s.v. “token.”

^46. Hans Jonas, The Gnostic Religion (Boston: Beacon, 1963), 222–23.

^47. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Sparsiones,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991), 148–94.

^48. Nibley, Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, CWHN 16:303, 478, 505–6, 512, 519; cf. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Forty-Day Mission of Christ,” Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:37 n. 77.

^49. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Stick of Judah,” in Since Cumorah, CWHN 8 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1988), 1–48.

^50. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Tenting, Toll, and Taxing,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10:41; cf. especially nn. 27–28.

^51. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 127.

^52. Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 61.

^53. Ibid., 71.

^54. Ibid., 72.

^55. Ibid., 82.

^56. Ibid., 205.

^57. Words of Joseph Smith, 368.

^58. Ibid., 245–46.

^59. See Hugh W. Nibley, “The Early Christian Prayer Circle,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:45–99.

^60. Edward B. Lytton, Zanoni (New York: Burt, 1885).

^61. Words of Joseph Smith, 369.

^62. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 67.

^63. Ibid. (emphasis added).

^64. Ibid., 95.

^65. Hugh W. Nibley, “A Strange Thing in the Land: The Return of the Book of Enoch,” in Enoch the Prophet, CWHN 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1986), 178–83.

^66. Harry Sperling and Maurice Simon, trans., Zohar, 5 vols. (New York: Soncino, 1984), 1:257.

^67. Apocryphon of John 1:73–74.

^68. 1 Enoch 99:2.

^69. 1 Enoch 65:6.

^70. 1 Enoch 106:13–17a.

^71. 1 Enoch 98:15; 99:2.

^72. See Fabio Mora, “I ‘Silenzi erodotei,’” Studi storico religiosi 5 (1981): 209–11, citing Herodotus 2.170; Karl Albert, “Kult und Metaphysik bei Platon,” Studi storico religiosi 5 (1981): 5–14.

^73. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride 9.

^74. Nibley, Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, CWHN 16:436–49.

^75. Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 186.

^76. Sir Mark Aurel Stein, Innermost Asia, 3 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1930), 2:707; see also Hugh W. Nibley, “Sacred Vestments,” in Temple and Cosmos, CWHN 12:114–15, fig. 28.

^77. See Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill (Boston: Gambit, 1969), picture and caption facing p. 273. See also Nibley, “Early Christian Prayer Circle,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:73–74.

^78. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 57.

^79. Ibid., 58.

^80. Ibid., 59.

^81. Ibid.

^82. Ibid., 60–61.

^83. Words of Joseph Smith, 304; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 237.

^84. Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 82.

^85. Benjamin F. Johnson, My Life’s Review (Independence, MO: Zion’s Printing, 1947), 96.

^86. Words of Joseph Smith, 381–82.

^87. Heber C. Kimball to Parley P. Pratt, 17 June 1842, Family and Church History Department Archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

^88. Papyrus Leiden T32 3/10–20, in Bruno H. Stricker, “De Egyptische Mysterien: Pap. Leiden T32,” Ondheidkundige mededeelingen uit het Rijksmuseum van Oudheiden te Leiden 34 (1953): 18–19; see Hugh W. Nibley, “A Pioneer Mother,” in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:475–77.

^89. Louis Ginzberg, Legends of the Jews, 7 vols. (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1946–47): 1:177; Book of Jasher 7:24–30; “Nimrod,” in The Jewish Encyclopedia, 12 vols. (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1901–06), 9:309–11.

^90. Nibley, Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, CWHN 16:434; see 427–36.

^91. Alexander Altmann, “The Gnostic Background of the Rabbinic Adam Legends,” Jewish Quarterly Review 35 (1944–45): 390–91.

^92. Ibid.

^93. See Nibley, Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, CWHN 16:246–49.

^94. For example, see The Poetical Works of John Milton, ed. David Mas-son, 3 vols. (London: Macmillan, 1874), 1:133.

^95. 1QS IV, 22–23.

^96. Alexander Kohut, “Parsic and Jewish Legends of the First Man,” Jewish Quarterly Review 3 (1891): 239.

^97. Ben Sirach 50:11, 16; 49:16; see R. H. Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament (Oxford: Clarendon, 1964), 506, 508, 510.

^98. Altmann, “Gnostic Background of the Rabbinic Adam Legends,” 387.

^99. Secrets of Enoch 31:3–6.

^100. Jubilees 3:27.

^101. Clementine Recognitions 1.47–48, in PG 1:1235.

^102. R. H. Charles, Book of Enoch (Oxford: Clarendon, 1912), ix.

^103. Journal of Discourses, 18:303.

^104. See the references in Hugh W. Nibley, “The Enoch Figure,” in Enoch the Prophet, CWHN 2:19–20, 56.

^105. See Nibley, “Sacrifice of Isaac,” in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:326.

^106. Hugh W. Nibley, “Old World Ritual in the New World,” in An Approach to the Book of Mormon, CWHN 6 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1988), 295–310.

^107. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Hierocentric State,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10:99–102.

^108. Louis V. Zabkar, “The Theocracy of Amarna and the Doctrine of the BA,” JNES 13 (1954): 87.

^109. Cf. Hugh W. Nibley, “Three Shrines: Mantic, Sophic, and Sophistic,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10:343–51.

^110. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 159.

^111. Ibid., 112.

^112. Erwin Goodenough, Jewish Symbols in the Greco-Roman Period, 10 vols. (New York: Pantheon, 1953), 1:vii.

^113. Jacob Neusner, “Ritual without Myth: The Use of Legal Materials for the Study of Religions,” Religion 5 (1965): 91.

^114. Ibid.

^115. Ibid., 91–92.

^116. Ibid., 95.

^117. Ibid.

^118. Ibid.

^119. Ibid., 100.

^120. Ibid.

^121. Jacob Milgrom, “The Temple Scroll,” Biblical Archaeologist 41 (September 1978): 109.

^122. Ibid., 114.

^123. Ibid.

^124. Ibid.

^125. Ibid., 120.

^126. Nibley, “Baptism for the Dead,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:100–167.

^127. Cf. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Christian Envy of the Temple,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4:391–434.

^128. Valentinius, Evangelium Veritatis (The Gospel of Truth) XXII, 13–14 (Zürich: Rascher, 1956).

^129. Geo Widengren, The Gnostic Attitude, ed. Birger A. Pearson (Santa Barbara, CA: Institute of Religious Studies, 1973), 12.

^130. Ibid., 18.

^131. Ibid., 6, 8.

^132. This is included in appendix 3 of Nibley, Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, CWHN 16:487–501.

^133. Carl Schmidt, ed. and trans., Kephalaia (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1940), 41.

^134. Gospel of Philip 69 (117).

^135. Gospel of Philip 85 (133).

^136. Gospel of Philip 70 (118).

^137. Widengren, The Gnostic Attitude, 12–20.

^138. Karl-Wolfgang Tröger, Mysterienglaube und Gnosis im Corpus Hermeticum XIII (Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1971), 3–4.

^139. Martin P. Nilsson, “Early Orphism and Kindred Religious Movements,” Harvard Theological Review 28 (July 1935): 230.

^140. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride 3.

^141. Theodor Hopfner, Plutarch, Über Isis und Osiris (Prague: Orientalisches Institut, 1940–41), 59–60.

^142. Edouard Naville, Das ägyptische Totenbuch der XVIII. bis XX. Dynastie (Graz: Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, 1971).

^143. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 58–59.

^144. Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 60, 104.

^145. Ibid., 72.

^146. Words of Joseph Smith, 366.

^147. Ibid.

^148. William Shakespeare, Hamlet, act 1, scene 2.

^149. Robert N. Bellah et al., Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American Life (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985).

^150. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 47.

^151. Ibid., 131.

^152. Ibid., 135.

^153. Ibid., 16.

^154. Ibid., 136.

^155. Ibid., 144; cf. Ether 8:18–20.

^156. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 206.

^157. Ibid., 146.

^158. Ibid., 275.

^159. Ibid., 256.

^160. Ibid., 248–50.

^161. Ibid., 252–53.

^162. Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 187; cf. D&C 110:16.

^163. Words of Joseph Smith, 318.

^164. Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 83.

^165. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 253.

^166. Ibid., 204; cf. 213.

^167. Manuscript History of Brigham Young, 9 June 1844, comp. Elden J. Watson (Salt Lake City: Smith Secretarial Service, 1968), 169.

^168. Spencer W. Kimball, “The False Gods We Worship,” Ensign 6 (June 1976): 4, 6.

^169. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 392.

^170. William Butler Yeats, “The Second Coming.”

^171. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 169.

^172. Words of Joseph Smith, 60.

^173. Journal of Discourses, 16:123.

^174. Ibid., 17:113–14.

^175. Ibid., 15:3.

^176. Ibid., 13:148.

^177. Ibid., 18:244.

^178. Ibid., 9:3.

31

Assembly and Atonement

This article appeared in King Benjamin’s Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom,” ed. John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 119–45.

Public and Private

At a recent general conference we heard of plans for building a larger “tabernacle.”1 That word taken literally denotes the opposite of an assembly hall, where everybody meets. A tabernacle (Latin tabernaculum) is “a little house made of boards,” a quick shelter or booth put together from boards, branches, and bits of clothing. The roots behind the English word booth describe its purpose: it is the Semitic bayt from the verb bāta-yabÄ«tu meaning “to spend the night” and certainly suggests our word bide or abide. The Hebrew sukkāh is the same as the Egyptian seh (sḥ), with an ideogram depicting the booth that provided shelter—“shadow in the daytime from the heat, and . . . covert from the storm and from rain” (Isaiah 4:6)—for an individual family living in the open during the Passover (see Leviticus 23:42–43; Nehemiah 8:17). “Thou mayest not eat within thy gates” (Deuteronomy 12:17; cf. 12:18).

The people whom Benjamin commanded to assemble “gathered themselves together throughout all the land” (Mosiah 2:1). And yet they all enjoyed a private family outing, for they “pitched their tents round about, every man according to his family, . . . every family being separate one from another” (Mosiah 2:5). This was the practice observed at the Feast of Tabernacles, and booths are one of the characteristic features of great national assemblies of the ancients throughout the world. At the culmination of the celebration we have both the vast unison of the hallelujah shouts and the private thoughts, secret names, and whispered exchanges of the initiation that preceded and followed with name, seal, mark, and personal registration.2

Some today have trouble making the distinction between what is strictly private in one’s thinking—after all, we are commanded to pray in secret—and what is necessarily shared among members of the Church. Some would have uniform political commitment required of all members, and some would have mission and stake presidents prescribe what books may be read and what music may be heard by the individual members. How far does free agency go? How far can individual tastes be assigned? No one was a more stalwart exponent of temperance than Brigham Young; yet when his father asked him to sign the Temperance Pledge, he resolutely refused. What he objected to of course was being officiously told what his principles were.3

Albert Einstein begins his book The World as I See It with the thought: “A hundred times every day I remind myself that my inner and outer life depend on the labours of other men, living and dead, and that I must exert myself in order to give in the same measure as I have received and am still receiving.”4 And yet no one was ever more aloof, absorbed, private, and original than Einstein, and still his inner and outer life are not to be separated.

Committees do not think; they noodle, throw things around, drop suggestions, send up flags and signals in the hope that someone may react with an original idea. But committees themselves contain nothing of the deep, prolonged, concentrated thought of the individual or the brilliant flashes of insight that may result. Solon, the wisest of the Greeks, said that the Athenians were too smart by half individually but collectively a lot of simpletons. It is always gratifying to discover that the members of a quorum, board, committee, or faculty are individually smarter than they are collectively. That is necessarily the case because each has certain ideas that would not be quite acceptable to everybody. Yet we still come together to consult; we still warm up to each other’s presence. I might say of family, friends, and Church members what St. Augustine said of God: “Fecisti nos ad te et inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te—You made us to be with you, and so our heart is restless until we can be with you”5 (and when we are all with you, we are of course all together with each other—we are made both to be together and to stand alone but too much of either condition can drive one crazy).

The Great Assembly

Over the years, I have spoken about the “great assembly,” or year-rite. People have asked me just what I mean by this. I can best sum it up from an article I wrote forty-five years ago, now beyond the statute of limitations:

That is the panegyris, the great [New Year’s] assembly of the entire race to participate in solemn rites essential to the continuance of its corporate and individual wellbeing. . . . At hundreds of holy shrines, each believed to mark the exact center of the universe and represented as the point at which the four quarters of the earth converged—“the navel of the earth”—one might have seen assembled at the New Year—the moment of creation, the beginning and ending of time—vast concourses of people, each thought to represent the entire human race in the presence of all its ancestors and gods.

A visitor . . . could have witnessed ritual contests: foot, horse, and wagon races, . . . choral competitions, the famous Troy game, beauty contests, and . . . [especially] the now famous ritual year-drama . . . [in which] the king wages combat with his dark adversary of the underworld, emerging victorious after a temporary defeat from his duel with death, . . . as the worthy and recognized ruler of the new age.6

The drama celebrated the creation of the world, the marriage and coronation of the king, and the birthday of the human race. It culminated in a feast of abundance, the king having proven his capacity to bring prosperity and victory to the people. All these elements are present in Benjamin’s celebration. “The ‘origin’ of the drama (both of Greek tragedy and of the dramatic spectacles of the ancient Near East and of Europe),” writes Mircea Eliade, “has been traced back to certain seasonal rituals which, broadly speaking, presented the following sequence: conflict between two antagonistic principles (Life and Death, God and the Dragon, etc.), tragic suffering of the God, lamentation at his death and jubilation to greet his ‘resurrection.’”7

King Benjamin sums up the purpose of the meeting as at-one-ment, bringing together man with God and also men with each other, but men do not swear loyalty to each other; their common loyalty to God alone unites them in the most perfect possible unity (see Mosiah 5:2–5). In fact, Benjamin explains that the purpose of the meeting is “that they might give thanks to the Lord . . . , that they might rejoice and be filled with love towards God and all men” (Mosiah 2:4). That is the spirit of the great assembly everywhere; it recalls the Golden Age when men and gods lived together in a heaven on earth.

The Coronation Assembly

Since treating the subject of ritual in the Melchizedek Priesthood manual for 1957 (lesson 23),8 I have come upon more confirmation, such as a particularly interesting writing of Nathan the Babylonian, a writer of the tenth century a.d., who has left us an eyewitness account of the coronation of the Prince of the Captivity or Exilarch in Babylonia. He speaks with the detachment of a Gentile though he may have been a Jew.9 Since we find no extended description of a coronation in the Old Testament, as we do in the Book of Mormon, and since no one showed interest in the remarkably uniform pattern of ancient coronations until the present century, Nathan’s account provides us with strong evidence for the authenticity of Mosiah’s account.

Because these Jews living in Babylonia had lost their real king and yet wished to continue their ancient customs, it was necessary to choose a candidate. The chief men of the community came together to appoint the new Exilarch from one of the most illustrious families. The elders then set him apart by the laying on of hands and sent out a proclamation that all should come to the coronation, bringing the most costly presents of gold, silver, and textiles that each could afford. Note that Benjamin, in a list of contrasts between himself and the conventional divine kings, expressly forbids that very thing: “I have . . . not sought gold nor silver nor any manner of riches of you” (Mosiah 2:12). In Babylonia, the day before the affair a wooden tower ten feet high and four and a half feet broad was erected as a speaker’s platform, so the king could be seen and heard by the vast multitude. On the top was a throne covered by a baldachin, or tent, and on either side at a lower level were seats for two counselors— on the right the head of the School of Sura, on the left the head of the School of Pumbadetha. The tower was covered with costly materials, behind which at ground level a highly trained youth choir was concealed.10

When King Benjamin finishes his address, he says, “I am about to go down to my grave . . . in peace, and my immortal spirit may join the choirs above in singing the praises of a just God” (Mosiah 2:28). In the account of Nathan the Babylonian, the Exilarch’s descent from the tower after his final speech was accompanied by the heavenly voices behind the veil. The ḥazzān, or cantor, representing the old king, began with a blessing on the congregation followed by the antiphonal hymn of praise by the congregation. The people arose and gave the Eighteen Benedictions. Then the king appeared on the tower and sat on his throne between the two lesser thrones. Then all the people sat. The cantor alone sang “Redeemer of Israel” and all the people stood for prayer; all the youths shouted “Holiness to the Lord.” And then the ḥazzān put his head and shoulders into the baldachin, representing Moses’ meeting with the Lord at the kappōreṯ, the tent of the covenant (later the veil of the temple), and exchanged words, including the secret name, in a whisper so that only those nearby could hear. When the blessing ended, the boys in the chorus shouted “Amen,” all the people keeping silent until the blessings were completed. Then the Prince of the Captivity, having received his authority (he was now the king), spoke openly and taught on the subject of the lesson for that day; an interpreter or translator (Aramaic meturgeman) stood by because the people spoke Aramaic and the scripture was Hebrew. The king taught with great passion, keeping his eyes closed, his head wrapped in a tallit; as he talked for an hour there was not a peep in the congregation, for if anyone uttered a single word he uncovered his eyes and terror and dread fell upon all the people—even so does Benjamin hold his congregation spellbound in awe and humiliation.

The address was followed by a questioning period; a wise old man, very shrewd and instructed, acted as intercessor. The ḥazzān gave a New Year’s greeting of long life: “Long live our Prince of the Captivity; may you all live long.” We recall that Benjamin declares, “This day he hath . . . begotten you” (Mosiah 5:7)—it was the universal birthday, the day of creation, the natalia; to celebrate it the people bring the first fruits of the New Year and animals for sacrifice (see Mosiah 2:3). To mark the new birthday as a rebirth, King Benjamin gives the people a new name as a covenantal token. As in Mosiah’s account, register was taken of the names of those present, acknowledging their donations. Then the Book of the Law was brought, and a priest and a Levite both read from it, after which the cantor—the old king—took the book to the new Exilarch, and all the people rose to their feet as the new Exilarch read to them from the Book of the Law. As in Mosiah’s account, the main purpose of the event was to give a refresher course in the Law to the entire nation. To be the interpreter for the royal teacher was considered a very high honor indeed, and a rich and important man was chosen for the privilege. The prince was again blessed by the Book of the Law, which was returned to its place with blessings “forever and ever.” The people then fell to and enjoyed the sumptuous feast; Nathan lays special emphasis on the dessert.

As in Mosiah, there were frequent exchanges between the king and the people, the latter reciting in unison. This explains the odd circumstance in which the people “all cried aloud with one voice” (Mosiah 4:2>) and proceeded to recite in unison an ecstatic statement of some fifty words. How could they do it spontaneously “with one voice”? Throughout the world such acclamations were led by a special cheerleader, sometimes called a stasiarch, who stood before the crowd and received notes from important people or shouts from the audience requesting particular cheers. He would recite a sentence to the people and wave a flag to lead them in a uniform chant (compare Deuteronomy 27:14–26). Sometimes the king himself chose to lead the cheering, and some Roman emperors enjoyed it. There was no limit to what could be shouted in unison, and it could go on for hours.

The Nothingness of Man

Benjamin begins his talk on public policy by distancing himself from the once-conventional model of the divine year-king, disclaiming any supernatural status for himself. Not only is he not “more than a mortal man” (Mosiah 2:10), but he is a sadly typical one, “like as yourselves, subject to all manner of infirmities in body and mind” (Mosiah 2:11). What a confession! And yet we now find everywhere that the nothingness of man is the theme of the great year-drama.

Today the great year-rite is being examined even more closely. Professor Hornung, the most celebrated of today’s Egyptologists, says that the coming together of the Egyptians to rehearse the creation of the world, the fall of man, and all that followed had three purposes. The first was to give some sort of explanation for the utterly wretched human condition on earth, which is always on the brink of failure and always looking forward to death.11 Arthur Koestler and others conclude that “our race is . . . a very sick biological product,” and there is nothing we can do about it; we are programmed for failure.12 Koestler, after a lifelong search, solved the problem by suicide. But the ancients had a better way—they dramatized the situation. As uniform as the protocol of the feast itself was the drama that went with it. The drama began with the council in heaven discussing the creation, then continued with a dispute over leadership, the casting out of the adversary, the Garden of Eden, and the fall of man. These marvelous temple plays, some of which survive from very ancient times, give solace to our sorry state by lending it some majesty and dignity. The ancients went to the heart of the matter where our troubles are concerned, but tossed up their hands in despair when looking for a solution. It was simply beyond them. The choruses wail and lament; the lead players like the lyric poets wring their hands in despair: “O the human race!” says the chorus, “I have calculated your worth and find it sums up to exactly nothing.”13 Benjamin’s sentiments exactly. A long tragic drama or trilogy of tragedies would be followed up by a slapstick comedy to make life endurable by laughing at ourselves.

Hornung’s second point involves the question, why does God leave men alone to suffer? Plato in the Republic accuses Aeschylus of charging God with aporia—failure to provide or falling short. Either God was helpless to save men, or willingly stood by and let them suffer, an act which would make him either weak or vicious. The ancients never answered that one, as Omar Khayyám reminds us with wicked glee.

The third point was the utter cruelty of the abrupt curtailment of human life, long, long before any individual has had half a chance of using even a fraction of his potentialities— why are we so overendowed and then hustled from the scene before we can make proper use of our talents? It all seems so wrong.

Here, of course, we have the difference between Benjamin’s teachings and those of the Greeks and Egyptians. Many recent studies have shown the close resemblance of the ancient Hebrew Wisdom literature to that of the Egyptians. Both reach King Solomon’s conclusion about this world:

I have seen all the works that are done under the sun; and, behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. That which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which is wanting cannot be numbered. . . . I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly: I perceive that this also is vexation of spirit. For in much wisdom is much grief and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow. (Ecclesiastes 1:14–15, 17–18)

Man is a born loser, but it is here that the ancients part company with Benjamin—they think they have seen it all and so are guilty of both overrating and underrating themselves. The overrating is quite absurd: “And now I ask, can ye say aught of yourselves? . . . Nay. Ye cannot say that ye are even as much as the dust of the earth. . . . And I, even I, whom ye call your king, am no better than ye yourselves are; . . . I am old, and am about to yield up this mortal frame” (Mosiah 2:25–26). “For even at this time, my whole frame doth tremble exceedingly while attempting to speak unto you” (Mosiah 2:30). At the normal year-rite, the king was expected to be victorious in combat, majestic, irresistible, a rampant bull.

Then Benjamin really gets serious: “For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man” (Mosiah 3:19). That is the key to the whole situation—we are dealing with the natural man and the natural man only. Jacob frankly admits that entropy is the fate of the natural man: “This flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more” (2 Nephi 9:7). Moses, landing on earth as a natural man, is surprised to discover that “man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed” (Moses 1:10). But yet a couple of verses later he announces that he is nothing less than “a son of God, in the similitude of his Only Begotten” (Moses 1:13).

After the Nephite king spoke, he saw that his people had come to view “themselves in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth” (Mosiah 4:2). Benjamin rejoiced to see that “the knowledge of the goodness of God . . . has awakened you to a sense of your nothingness, and your worthless and fallen state” (Mosiah 4:5). “Ye should remember, and always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and his goodness and long-suffering towards you, unworthy creatures. . . . If ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, . . . and ye shall grow . . . in the knowledge of that which is just and true. And ye will not have a mind to injure one another” (Mosiah 4:11–13). This definition of the real world makes a nice contrast to what we call “the real world” today, where everyone is advised to learn martial arts, both to avoid and to inflict injury. And then the cruelest cut of all, “For behold, are we not all beggars?” (Mosiah 4:19). If we become too much attached to our earthly carnal state, Benjamin reminds us in effect, “There is nothing for you here. You can’t stay here. You should be glad that this is not where you belong!”

During his life span on this earth, in which all are in the samesituation, “the naturalman is anenemyto God”—carnal, sensual, and devilish, or as we would say, oversexed, greedy, and mean, or perhaps lecherous, pampered, and vicious. Obviously things are out of order; but if we are really nothing, how can we save ourselves? Someone has to intervene, and here, with a sigh of relief, we learn that Benjamin has been tutored for this talk by an angel. This shocks us into realizing that we have not seen it all after all. There may be more to life than going to the office every day—this is not “all there is!”

Where did we get all those gifts and endowments with which we enter the world and then leave without ever using them? This question of Plato’s was repeated by Lamarck—to Darwin’s immense annoyance; he called it an abominable mystery. If natural selection chooses only those defenses of which the creature has absolute need for survival, why has our brain capacity so outrageously exceeded our needs? Where did we develop it? Where did we need it, if not in a far more sophisticated environment than we have here, where the stupidest species have survived the longest? We are equipped for much greater things than we ever achieve, and we yearn for something better than we can ever expect here and yet envisage most positively. That is what Plato calls anamnesis, dim memories of a better world that give us intimations of immortality at the sight of the kaloskagathos, something good, true, and beautiful. We are living in a dismal swamp between two glorious uplands. Why this unhappy interruption? For life is an interruption which consists almost entirely of an unbroken succession of interruptions. All this is to try man and to tempt him. For in getting ready for the long pull ahead, we must learn to cope with the worst.

Principles of Government

After discounting all of man’s boasted claims to independence—“of what have ye to boast? . . . can ye say aught of yourselves?” (Mosiah 2:24–25)—and declaring himself satisfied with a place in the choir above, while resigning his royal teaching job on earth, Benjamin lays down the first principle of government, which may appear very strange to us but is a corollary to the nothingness of man: there shall be no contentions among the people lest they “list to obey the evil spirit” (Mosiah 2:32). Tendere means to stretch a rope, contendere is a tug-of-war. The Lord’s first words to the Nephites, after he had introduced himself to them and told them how to baptize, dealt with contention:

According as I have commanded you . . . there shall be no disputations among you, as there have hitherto been; neither shall there be disputations among you concerning the points of my doctrine, as there have hitherto been. For verily, verily I say unto you, he that hath the spirit of contention is not of me but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another. Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away. (3 Nephi 11:28–30)

Does he want to do away with the adversarial method, two-party debate, and legal confrontation, which we consider the best means of settling an argument? Exactly. The trouble is that such methods settle nothing. As Karl von Clausewitz noted, political argument leads to war, which simply “continu[es] . . . political intercourse [argument] . . . by other means,”14 until the exhausted powers fall back on diplomacy again, and so prepare for another war. I spent most of my mission teaching the gospel in villages in Baden, Germany, both in the Black Forest and the Rhine Plain. The villages were either Protestant or Catholic, and there was always tension, mistrust, and dislike between them. Why? Because some learned divines had held formal disputations on Christian doctrine some four hundred years before. Need we say more? The ancient plays likewise are endless discussion and argument with chorus and semichorus, protagonist and antagonist, constantly going at it and only making matters worse. The oldest surviving play begins with the king announcing his program: “My children, we must think this thing through.”15 But the play leaves us with the battle of the sexes, of the races, and nations all going full blast.

The ladies’ chorus—the Danaids—express their loathing of Egyptian-style marriage and can’t stand men of darker skin, and the nations of Egypt and Argos exchange insults and go to war. Such was the result of their endless discussions in tireless debate, and their raging sexism, racism, and nationalism still flourish in the same countries.

How do we solve things then? Benjamin makes it clear:

And now, my brethren, . . . as ye have kept my commandments, and also the commandments of my father, and have prospered, and have been kept from falling into the hands of your enemies [the two things which the king must guarantee], even so if ye shall keep the commandments of my son, or the commandments of God which shall be delivered unto you by him, ye shall prosper in the land, and your enemies shall have no power over you. (Mosiah 2:31)

This looks like autocratic monarchy and bald theocracy, but Benjamin has already settled that issue by his heavy emphasis on both his own mediocre qualifications and the right of the people in common with the royal family to receive revelation for themselves. They too can say, “And we, ourselves, also, through . . . the manifestations of his Spirit, have great views of that which is to come; and were it expedient, we could prophesy of all things” (Mosiah 5:3). Here the people receive their individual revelations. To prophesy means both to foretell and speak out, but here there is a contrary-to-fact or future-less-vivid condition: the individual is expected to receive and follow the promptings of the Spirit for himself, but not to introduce his personal revelations into public discussion. It is “expedient” for all to receive “great views” by revelation, but not expedient, unless so commanded, to teach them publicly.

Benjamin feels strongly that people have been on the wrong path in their confrontational politics (see Mosiah 2:32). If they continue that way, they will die in their sins and receive everlasting punishment (see Mosiah 2:33). In engaging in partisan debate, “ye do withdraw yourselves from the Spirit of the Lord, that it may have no place in you to guide you in wisdom’s paths” (Mosiah 2:36). This is a real and omnipresent danger in society: “And now, O man, remember, and perish not” (Mosiah 4:30). The danger is perennial: “If ye do not watch yourselves, and your thoughts, and your words, and your deeds . . . even unto the end of your lives, ye must perish” (Mosiah 4:30). We are constantly liable to slip into partisan controversy.

This seems contrary to what we have been taught about such things as the importance of debate and the two-party system. But Benjamin is above all that; he wants to transfer our whole activity to another plane. “[Stand steadfast] in the faith of that which is to come,” he says, “which was spoken by the mouth of the angel” (Mosiah 4:11). Benjamin puts it bluntly, “Believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend” (Mosiah 4:9). What you have to do, he says, is to “believe that ye must repent of your sins . . . and humble yourselves before God; and ask in sincerity of heart that he would forgive you” (Mosiah 4:10). Does that sound authoritarian? We seem to forget that these words were handed not only to Benjamin but also to Joseph Smith by an angel from another sphere. Their purpose is to help prepare us for that other sphere. Do not expect the words of the angel to be like other texts, conservative or liberal. Benjamin pleads desperately, “all ye old men, and also ye young men, . . . and [even] you little children who can understand my words, . . . awake to a remembrance of the awful situation of those that have fallen into transgression” (Mosiah 2:40). Plainly, things among the Nephites had reached a dangerous state. The people had wandered from the road of keeping the commandments, “both temporal and spiritual” (Mosiah 2:41). What we should be after is not to gain advantage in this world but to “dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness” (Mosiah 2:41). He knows that it will sound unrealistic. If that suggests our worldly vantage point as some faraway wishful thinking or fantasy, Benjamin brings us around: “O remember, remember that these things are true” (Mosiah 2:41). They are not imaginary; it is the everyday world, the light of common day, that is a deception. Far from being expected to accept these things on authority, the people presently are given to see it all for themselves.

The word power occurs over four hundred times in the Book of Mormon. Power is the essence of politics where the object of the game is to be the party or individual in power. This is true, even though few would challenge Lord Acton’s famous maxim, “All power corrupts.”16

But Benjamin, in his speech on government and national policy, uses the word only seven times, of which five refer to God, who “has . . . all power” (Mosiah 4:9). The other two passages speak only of powers which no man possesses— that is, the power to express our full obligation to God (see Mosiah 2:20) and the power which our enemies do not have over us if we obey the commandments of God (see Mosiah 2:31). What power does that leave to feeble man? There are only two sources of power. One is God, and the other the evil one who covets power: “Satan . . . sought . . . that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down” (Moses 4:3). What he wanted was power over others, and so it has ever been with man. From Cain come “oaths . . . given by them of old who also sought power. . . . [The kinsmen of Akish] were kept up by the power of the devil to administer these oaths unto the people, to keep them in darkness, to help such as sought power to gain power. . . . Whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations, to get power and gain, . . . they shall be destroyed. . . . Suffer not . . . that these murderous combinations shall get above you, which are built up to get power and gain” (Ether 8:15–16, 22–23).

How remarkable that a royal discourse on the subject of government and dominion never once refers to power and tells the people bluntly that the king never wanted their money—he could get what was sufficient for his needs by working on the farm! And this total shifting of values takes us directly to the subject of the atonement.

The Politics of Shame

The atonement requires a totally different state of mind from that which men suppose leads them to success. Benjamin makes a direct appeal to the hearts of men. In case after case, he teaches what suggests “the politics of shame.” The phrase has been revived in a recent book by Stuart Schneiderman,17 and the word shame has suddenly come into general use by politicians against each other. It is a sense of shame that keeps people from stepping over the line and doing mean and ignoble things. Benjamin knew that when he said that every man’s immortal soul should be awake “to a lively sense of his own guilt, . . . his breast [filled] with guilt, and pain, and anguish, . . . like an unquenchable fire” (Mosiah 2:38). The result is “never-ending torment” (Mosiah 2:39). But nothing could be farther from today’s ethic, which is to feel shame only for what an opponent does and call public attention to it as a ploy to take over power. This relieves the inner tension on both sides, and since “the great American cultural revolution” of the 1960s, Schneiderman writes, “Ostentatious displays of wealth were good, as were exhibitionistic displays of one’s sexual prowess. . . . Obnoxious and insulting behavior became acceptable. . . . Rude language became a sign of freedom.”18 Fame became more highly valued than shame: “Seeing omens of destruction everywhere we grasp at solutions offered by guilt culture: more police, more courts, more prisons, more litigation, more regulation, more lawyers.”19 And all of that is shameful, and Benjamin turns away from it.

In pointing the way for his people, the king cites case after case where their own immediate reaction should be one of shame. “Believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend” (Mosiah 4:9). This should make me feel cheap and ashamed of my own arrogance, and the reaction is “Believe that ye must repent . . . and humble yourselves before God; and ask in sincerity of heart that he would forgive you” (Mosiah 4:10). Does God have to argue his case? Not “if ye have known of his goodness and have tasted of his love” (Mosiah 4:11). That is another feeling: taste, like shame, is a final argument about which non est disputandum—there is no argument. We are the first, last, and only judges of our actions, and our clear and vivid recollection shall testify against us at the judgment. When you compare “the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and his goodness and long-suffering towards you, unworthy creatures,” the shame will bring you into “the depths of humility” (Mosiah 4:11). Is it not shameful that you should “have a mind to injure one another, . . . [that you should let] your children . . . go hungry, . . . transgress the laws of God, and fight and quarrel one with another, . . . [giving way to] the evil spirit” (Mosiah 4:13–14)? And how shameful to turn your back on the beggar, with some self-serving rationalization that “the man has brought upon himself his misery” (Mosiah 4:17). How do you know that? And you a beggar yourself! For shame! Is it necessary to pass a law against holding back on sharing what God has given you liberally? Or to use verse 27—that “all these things [be] done in wisdom and order, for it is not requisite that a man should run faster than he has strength” (Mosiah 4:27)—as an excuse for withholding your substance until a later time? What is it that prompts us to return what we have borrowed—fear of a lawsuit? (see Mosiah 4:28).

The Hard Question

A number of years ago I wrote a sixty-page article titled “The Meaning of the Atonement.”20 Some things were explained, but the great mysteries remain. “Mysterious, incomprehensible, . . . and inexplicable” are the workings of the atonement, according to the Encyclopedia of Mormonism.21 The first question which such an admission raises is whether all “things which pertain to our religion are only appendages” to what Joseph Smith declared to be the center of our religion—the atonement.22 Is it meant to remain mysterious? Not everything is incomprehensible to everybody: “It is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given” (Matthew 13:11). As the Pearl of Great Price tells us, some mysteries “ought not to be revealed at the present time” (explanation to Fac. 2, fig. 9); some are only “to be had in the Holy Temple of God” (Fac. 2, fig. 8); some “will be given in the own due time of the Lord” (Fac. 2, figs. 12–21). As to others: “If the world can find out these numbers, so let it be” (Fac. 2, fig. 11).

The mysteries are on the borderline, depending on our own qualifications. Scientific writers in the 1920s told us there were no more mysteries; today it is all a mystery. Chapters 14 to 17 in the Gospel of John describe in matter-offact terms the comings and goings, departures and arrivals, that ultimately put into effect the at-one-ment, or joining of the apostles and the Saints with the Father and the Son in heaven. Yet for conventional Christian theologians, all of this is quite unimaginable, without space or motion. So we see that mystery is knowledge not known to some: “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear” (Matthew 11:15). “Behold my beloved brethren, I will unfold this mystery unto you; if I do not, by any means, get shaken from my firmness in the Spirit, and stumble because of my over anxiety for you” (Jacob 4:18). A people are condemned who “will not search knowledge, nor understand great knowledge, when it is given unto them in plainness” (2 Nephi 32:7). We make our own mysteries; we are not meant to be kept in darkness, and the mysteries of heaven will be unfolded to us as we make an effort to understand them.

This is particularly true of the atonement. Students now beset me with searching questions, some are genuinely perplexed, and others are set on challenging the rationality of the gospel. I am assailed by eight questions in particular. The first three are those terrible questions, listed by Professor Hornung, which the ancients left unanswered. The plan of atonement offers a clear explanation.

First is the problem of evil. In our world, evil spoils everything, and it is everywhere, even ingrained into our own carnal, sensual, and devilish natures. Why is that? Answer: It was planned that way. We were once at one with the Father and hope to be so again. But meantime we are being prepared for a higher order of glory; our whole life here is a state of probation, as Jacob tells us (see 2 Nephi 2:21), and the adversary is permitted to try us and to tempt us. The existence of Satan is another of those points that leaves the clergy perplexed. Yet the existence of evil is at least as certain as the existence of gravitation; we must accept the reality of these two powerful forces whether we can explain them or not. We cannot proceed into the eternities in ignorance; we must know the worst if we are to cope with the worst and bring the atonement of the Father to others. We come down here to discover those weaknesses and vices that could not come out in the presence of God and angels to dig out the nitty-gritty of our earthly existence, recognize and acknowledge it in repentance, and wash it away in baptism.

Then there is that aporia—where is God when we need him? The explanation is to be found in the plan of salvation. The master of the house is one taking a far journey, leaving his servants on their own. He deliberately delays his return, and, when he does appear “like a thief in the night,” catches them completely off-guard, doing just what they normally do—some of them beating their fellow servants to get more work out of them, while they enjoy their perks in drunken dinner parties (Matthew 24:42–51; Joseph Smith—Matthew 1:46–54). If we are all to be at one again in the hereafter, King Benjamin reminds us, it is to be in a different spirit from that competitive neo-Darwinism, which he so vigorously condemns.

The third problem that distressed the ancients is the cruel curtailment of life, which shuts off the lives of almost all living things in midcourse. Why?—“Lest [Adam] put forth his hand and partake also of the tree of life, . . . and live forever [in his sins]” (Moses 4:28). After this life has been declared a vale of tears, we should only be too glad to get out of it as soon as possible, were it not for the uncertainty of the hereafter, which gives us pause and makes us decide to stick it out here in this dismal place. Yet the atonement makes this life bearable, even delightful. The doctrine of the atonement gives us permission to enjoy ourselves to the fullest here and now, as we revel in the gospel; time and space drop out of the question, leaving us completely at ease and inexpressibly happy (see Mosiah 2:41; 3:4, 13; 4:11–12; 5:3).

How can we apply the blood of Christ to relieve our present condition? Answer: It redeems us from our sins. To redeem is to buy back, to ransom. We return to the other world loaded with experience, some of it pretty bad, which can be turned to our advantage once we are purged of the vice in our nature. The scriptures use the language of business, of buying and selling, to make the problem clear to a money-minded people. We shall explain the blood presently.

But why payment? Cannot we simply acknowledge that all make mistakes, write them off, and “get on with our lives,” as the popular saying goes? Why must we pay the uttermost farthing? (see Matthew 5:26). That question was paramount with the ancients. The great tragedies begin with something seriously wrong in the land—plague, famine, war, etc. Someone has done foolish or wicked things and all are paying the price. We must find the culprit and payment must be made, both to put an end to disaster and to pay for the damage already done. Who shall it be? The king, because he is responsible for the welfare and safety of the state? The periodic sacrifice of kings, whom old age had rendered a liability to their people, was commonplace in primitive and ancient societies. “The king must die!” Oedipus was a king who refused to pay the price and instead placed himself at the head of the investigation and proceeded to accuse everyone else. The chorus reminds him that we are all in this together, and Oedipus admits, “we are all sick, none more than myself.” All are to blame. But how do we assess the blame individually and calculate the penalty? In a lump sum for all, choosing one scapegoat out of the whole community by impartial lottery? Is that fair? Yes, if we all share the suffering, and there is a very real way in which all do.

But before we consider sharing, we must ask why the payment must be painful. Why all the agony, on which Benjamin dwells so disturbingly? The Greek poinē is the clue. It is blood money, the payment of a debt, the evening up of accounts, according to the Lexicon,23 and it is always painful. The English word pain is borrowed from the ancient legal term pains and penalties, referring to the payment of a debt.

Note that the words pain, punish, penalty, repentance, penitence, penitentiary, and penal all imply a feeling of discomfort and at the same time of paying back, the pain remaining until the debt is cleared.

But why the emphasis on blood? Benjamin goes to the limit here. Answer: The blood makes it clear that (a) it is a real sacrifice and (b) it goes all the way. Even the interrupted sacrifice of Isaac required the token but real shedding of blood in circumcision of the covenant. Benjamin tells us that the Lord would sweat blood from every pore, not from the physical brutality of the Roman soldiers, but because “so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and abominations of his people” (Mosiah 3:7). There is a limit to physical suffering but not to spiritual. And this answers the final questions.

Why should one innocent person, Christ, suffer so horribly for the sins he did not commit? How can all that suffering be transferred from one person to another? Is that justice? The answer: Do not think that anyone is getting off easy. Each suffers to his capacity in time for his own sins: “there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter as were my pains,” Alma reports (Alma 36:21). And worst of all, “we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt” (Alma 11:43). Physical suffering has its limits at which the body shuts off, but not spiritual suffering, which requires the atoning blood of Christ more than any theory or abstraction. “God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life” (John 3:16). “So loved the world,” says the cynic, that he sacrificed somebody else? When you consider who that somebody was, or even who Abraham’s sacrifice was—far dearer to him than his own life, which Abraham had often put on the line—this makes the sacrifice of the Father equal to that of the Son.

But it was only when the angel said “Now I know!” (Genesis 22:12) that the ram was substituted—Abraham did not have to make the supreme sacrifice. Although his own life was spared on the altar, he must be given full faith and credit for having been prepared to sacrifice what was more precious to him than his life. Even so, we are expected to “do the works of Abraham” (D&C 132:32) and go all the way— eternal life is not cheaply bought.

All this is made possible by the principle of substitution or proxy or vicarious work, so well-known to Latter-day Saints. It should be clear how one can suffer for another. The work we do for our dead calls for a measure of trouble, inconvenience; we must take some pains in behalf of those for whom we feel responsible as they anxiously await our action for release from long confinement. They are, where possible, our closest relatives for whom we feel most responsible. And we can take further pains in long hours of searching the records, writing the histories, going to the temple at dawn—all very minor sacrifices—but for someone else. The leaders of all the great dispensations—Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Joseph Smith—suffered greatly for others, but there was only one who could suffer for all. The word suffer is from sub-ferre, “to bow under” or “to bear a load.” Only one has the capacity, strength, or greatness to bear the load of all. This is a mystery, but it is a mystery that anyone can understand. Who can deny that “if there be two spirits, . . . one shall be more intelligent than the other,” and, that being the case, that “there shall be another more intelligent than they” (Abraham 3:18–19)? Jesus Christ bore our load because he and only he was able to, his work and his glory being “to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man” (Moses 1:39). He shares all he has, as his Father does, with all who will receive it. That there is such a being is as certain as the proposition that one person can be greater than another.

The ancients saw light and life coming from the sun, and every creature that receives that life and light must pass it on to others. Benjamin insists that all who have received the bounty of God must also pass it on. “Are we not all beggars?” is more than a rhetorical question; we receive what we have not produced. It is a pure gift from God; even by working day and night, no one could hope to earn it. We must pass it on and not divert all the water of the canal to our own use: “For the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God” (Hebrews 6:7); “Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God” (Romans 15:7).

The sun is only one of countless participants in the pouring forth of energy into the cosmos, according to Moses and Abraham—“worlds without number” (Moses 1:33), “I could not see the end thereof” (Abraham 3:12), and so forth. And all are dependent on each other so that when one perishes “the heavens [shall] weep, yea, and all the workmanship of mine hands” (Moses 7:40), and God himself weeps, so closely are they bound in each other’s affections. “I . . . [gave them a] commandment, that they should love one another . . . ; but, behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood” (Moses 7:33). This is the reverse of atonement. In the eternal order of things we are all assembled and bound together, at-one, if only by the laws of nature—the four mysterious forces. It can easily be seen how sin—ego-centered, inconsiderate, spiteful—can loosen the bonds of affection, in the manner of entropy. These are far more than imaginary forces. Only the intervention of God himself who “possesses all power” can reverse the process (2 Nephi 9:7). Jacob tells us this in that other great address given by royal sanction in 2 Nephi 6–10, which should always be read along with the great words of Benjamin.

Notes

^1. Gordon B. Hinckley, “This Glorious Easter Morn,” Ensign 26 (May 1996): 65.

^2. For such assemblages celebrating both individual covenants and national unity, see Hugh W. Nibley, The Ancient State, CWHN 10 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991), 8–9, 41–43, 150–51, and passim.

^3. Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 14:225.

^4. Albert Einstein, The World as I See It (New York: Philosophical Library, 1949), 1.

^5. Augustine, Confessions 1.6.

^6. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Hierocentric State,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10:99–100.

^7. Mircea Eliade, The Forge and the Crucible (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1978), 10.

^8. Hugh W. Nibley, “Old World Ritual in the New World,” in An Approach to the Book of Mormon, 3rd ed., CWHN 6 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1988 [1st ed., 1957]), 295–310.

^9. Benzion Halper, Postbiblical Hebrew Literature (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1946), 1:37–38.

^10. See ibid., 39.

^11. See Erik Hornung, Der ägyptische Mythos von der Himmelskuh (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1982), x.

^12. Arthur Koestler, Janus: A Summing Up (London: Hutchinson, 1978), 2.

^13. Sophocles, Oedipus Rex, lines 1186–89.

^14. Karl von Clausewitz, War, Politics, and Power: Selections from “On War,” and “I Believe and Profess,” trans. and ed. Edward M. Collins (Chicago: Gateway, 1967), 83.

^15. Aeschylus, The Suppliant Maidens, line 176.

^16. “Power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely.” Lord Acton, letter to Bishop Mandell Creighton, 3 April 1887.

^17. See Stuart Schneiderman, Saving Face: America and the Politics of Shame (New York: Knopf, 1995).

^18. Ibid., 124.

^19. Ibid., 288–89.

^20. See Hugh W. Nibley, “The Meaning of the Atonement,” in Approaching Zion, CWHN 10 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1989), 554-614.

^21. Jeffrey R. Holland, “Atonement of Jesus Christ,” in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 1:86, citing John Taylor, The Mediation and the Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1882), 148–49.

^22. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 121.

^23. See Henry G. Liddell and Robert Scott, Greek-English Lexicon, 7th ed., s.v. “poinē.”

32

Abraham’s Temple Drama

This chapter is based on a presentation given on 6 April 1999 as part of the Book of Abraham Lecture Series sponsored by the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies at Brigham Young University; it was published in The Temple in Time and Eternity, ed. Donald W. Parry and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1999), 1–42.

The Pearl of Great Price is rightly named. It contains enormous value in a very small scope. Also, it has long been lying with “purest ray serene” in the dark caves of the ocean, or in a shabby back lot where the merchant discovered it (see Matthew 13:45–46). Like no other book, it contains in its sixty-five pages the answers to the ultimate questions of philosophy, religion, and science. Even more wonderful, it fills those enormous gaps in our records of the past for which science must give an accounting. What was going on during all those lost millennia that the Egyptologist Jan Assmann calls “the great forgetting”?1 We should know, and this book is good enough to tell us.

The Pearl of Great Price is a book of dispensations. Both Joseph Smith and Brigham Young said we do not know how many dispensations there have been, but the classic number in most ancient records is seven. A dispensation is a time when the heavens are open and truth is dispensed or handed out to men. It happened with Adam, Enoch, and Noah “before Abraham was,” and after Abraham with Moses, Christ, and Joseph Smith. Each one of these contributed his own story to this small handbook. Abraham’s story is the only apocryphon written in the first person—an oddity not overlooked in the Pearl of Great Price. The key passages to all of these books appear at length in our wonderful Pearl of Great Price. Notice that Abraham is squarely in the middle; all things seem to zero in on him. He has been called the most pivotal and strategic man in the course of world history. In his position he binds all things together and gives meaning and purpose to everything that happened. The whole world was rent by strife and rancor, and Abraham was like a man who sews together a badly rent garment. It was said that “charity . . . was asleep [in the world], and [Abraham] roused it.”2 He joined man to God when he and his wife won souls to God. “Were it not for men like Abraham,” said the Lord, “I would not have bothered to create heaven and earth, sun and moon.”3 Converting them was as if he had created them anew. He was the perfect one who brought man nearer to God. He entered into the covenant the world is based on, as if the world were firmly established for his sake, as if he were the Messiah come to establish the kingdom of God on earth. “My name was not known among My creatures, and thou hast made it known among them,” said God to Abraham. “I will regard thee as if thou wast associated with Me in the creation of the world.”4 “As many as receive this Gospel,” said the Lord, “shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed” (Abraham 2:10). “God said to Abraham: As I put Adam and then Noah in charge of all my creatures, I now put you in charge of them, and order you to give my blessing to them.”5

Before we get any further we must see the rest of the picture, for this superman is simply Everyman. What office did he hold? We know of none. What miracles did he perform? What dazzling appearances? He lived in the heroic age, a time of great migrations, of epic literature, but we read of no mighty combats, blow-by-blow, or challenges boasting heroic genealogy. His ten trials were Everyman’s trials. He was in trouble in business. The grass, water, and grazing rights on which he depended were often withheld from him. He never drove a hard bargain (the first rule of success according to Mr. Marriott), not even with the king of Sodom, or the generous Ephron the Hittite, who would have given him the burial cave for nothing. He yielded to Lot’s greedy cattlemen and gracefully withdrew. We never hear of him punishing anyone, though when the time came to get back his nephew’s property, he struck the marauding chieftains with brilliant strategy and knockout force. He forbade his children to marry into alien races, but they promptly went ahead and did so.

He seemed to be generous to the point of lacking common sense. He first sent out his servant Eliezer to look for lost wanderers, but he found none. Then Abraham on his one hundredth birthday, old and very sick, went out alone on the hottest day of the year because he thought he might find some wanderer lost in the desert. He found no one, but when he got home three men dropped in to visit him;6 “Lord of the Universe,” he cried, recognizing one of them, “is it the order of the Cosmos that I sit while you remain standing?”7

The scene, as the archaeologist André Parrot, the discoverer of Mari, a city of Abraham, remarks, “is as magnificent as it is strange.”8

Abraham was the essential Everyman, but never was there a less-ordinary individual. A recent issue of Time Magazine (29 March 1999) is devoted entirely to the study of this century’s twenty most influential scientists, thinkers, and inventors. The short biographies that accompany the accomplishments of each of these people point up the particular and peculiar idiosyncrasies of their creative genius. Interestingly, Albert Einstein and Philo Farnsworth are both on that list. But in a list of the twenty greatest minds of the last forty centuries, Abraham must surely make a strong bid for number one. Brief sketches given in the magazine describe the special traits and qualifications of the hundred geniuses of this century;9 those traits give an almost perfect character profile of Abraham. The first quality of all is precocious curiosity, which means a hunger for knowledge; as children these people were always disturbing their elders with searching questions about everything. To this weakness Abraham frankly confessed in that revealing second verse that lays out his goals in life: “desiring also to be one who possessed great knowledge, . . . and to possess a greater knowledge” (Abraham 1:2). A goodly portion of Abraham’s legendary biographical record tells how his question-asking as a child got him and his family into no end of trouble. From infancy he was asking searching questions about God, the cosmos, and the ways of men—embarrassing questions.10 When he emerged from the cave (at the age of ten days, or according to some reports, ten years, or according to others, thirteen years)11 in which his parents had been hiding him from the jealous king, he saw the sun and decided it was God; then the sun set and the moon and stars came up, and he thought that must be God and his attendants. When they set, he started asking questions.12 In one version he decided that the clouds must be the creative power because they darkened the sun; when the wind blew the clouds away, it was the wind. Then he asked whether the king, Pharaoh Nimrod, was God, and his parents got very nervous. When he refused to believe that Nimrod was God and started pointing out logical inconsistencies in such a claim, his parents saw trouble. But he went on asking questions. He was especially good at making fun of the worship of idols, a practice in which his own family indulged.13

As he grew older the questions grew more dangerous— he debunked the idols by clever arguments which, worst of all, he applied to the king. This threatened the high social position of the family at court, and they finally volunteered him for sacrifice. If you think this sounds fantastic, you should read the Instructions of Pharaoh Amenemhet I (1991–1962 B.C.), who tells how a conspiracy of ambitious courtiers and members of his own family attempted to murder him as he was napping after supper one night—Abraham’s story is thoroughly typical of real conditions at the perilous court of Egypt.14 The title of Abraham’s biography in the great Midrash is lech lecha, “keep moving!”15 Perpetual migration was one of the ten trials of Abraham, for the famine “wax[ed] sore in the land” (Abraham 2:1; see Genesis 12:10). In his suffering he knew how to feel for others.

The extreme independence of thought and action of our geniuses makes them all appear eccentric and willful to the rest of us, but that originality fostered their great inventiveness. At age fifteen Abraham had a job frightening the birds away from the fields at sowing time because they ate up all the seed in a time of great food shortage; he invented a sowing machine that covered the seeds with soil as it dropped them, thus protecting them from the birds—to whom, however, he apologized handsomely for cutting their rations— but gaining renown for his public service. This great zeal for the common good led him to plant trees and dig wells wherever his wanderings in the drought-ridden land led him— with no expectation of personal benefit—for the enjoyment of those who would come after. At Hebron he ran a school for outcasts where he received all comers. He always played fair: “Charity was dead and Abraham revived it” was a proverb. In our obsession with crime and Western scenarios, the Hauptthema (central theme) is always the pleasure of revenge, watching the bad guys suffer, inflicting exquisite tortures, if possible far surpassing those administered by the villain. Such vengeance was not for Abraham; Josephus tells us that Abraham stubbornly pleaded with God to spare the wickedest people in the world because he felt sorry for them, “because they were his friends and neighbors.”16 That is almost inconceivable to us in our modern Sodom and Gomorrah. “It is compassion and forgiveness alone that are the unfailing traits of the true descendants of Abraham.”17

He was eager to exchange ideas with the greatest thinkers of his time and in his continual travels he visited the courts and schools of Egypt and the Near East, where he made an enormous impression on the wisest and most learned men of the time. One of the best-known stories about him is how, when he was studying the stars on his own, the Lord himself came down and instructed him personally in astronomy. In receiving such blessings, Abraham always made the first move: “Thy servant has sought thee earnestly; now I have found thee” (Abraham 2:12).

We are told that that is the only case in which God appeared to man and talked with him person to person.18 Today we can add another one; the youth of Joseph Smith shows astonishing parallels to that of Abraham. Both were curious about everything, especially the stars, and asked searching questions that got their families into trouble and made them seek “another place of residence” (Abraham 1:1).

Still delving deeply into popular science, we turn to the current Astronomy Magazine (April 1999), where we learn that the questions that absorb the most advanced branches of science today are the same ones that have always done so, namely: Where did we come from? How does it all begin? Is this all there is? Where are we going? As Karl Popper tells us, all the answers to the questions of science remain forever tentative ones.19 And so it is that Abraham scores again. He, and if we look around, he alone has given us the answers to those very questions—in the temple.

Abraham and the Temple

The altar where Abraham and Isaac met the supreme test was on Mount Zion, the cosmic rock uniting heaven and earth, “whereon Adam had brought the first sacrifice”; it was the altar of Cain and Abel and Noah; “Abraham . . . knew that it was the place appointed for the Temple.”20

Maimonides says that Abraham chose Mount Moriah and dedicated it as the place of the future temple.21 As the great intercessor, Abraham joined Michael and Abel in a project of work for the dead, established in the temple.22 It was he who introduced prayers for the dead.23 Another link between God and man—every follower of Abraham must receive certain signs and tokens relating to sacrifice; Abraham and Isaac were both tested as offerings on the altar, and both arose unharmed in similitude of the Only Begotten and the resurrection.24

Today Jews are claiming Abraham rather than Moses as the founder of their religion, arguing that the covenant with Moses on Sinai was “but the fulfillment of the covenant made with Abraham.” All the great sacrifices of the past, “lost at the time of the Tower,” were restored by Abraham. God summoned Abraham to the site of the altar where Adam and Noah “offered the first sacrifice to me,” with the commandment, “It is now your duty, Abraham, to build it up again!”25 Again, according to Maimonides, God showed the future temple to Adam, who had received all of its ordinances. Everything Abraham does Adam did before him: Abraham restored what Adam had lost.26

It was Abraham who restored the temple after locating the site of Adam’s altar, which he rebuilt, renewing the covenants and ordinances.27 When the world turned to idolatry, Abraham alone was faithful, and so we get such sayings of the Lord: “If it were not for Abraham, I would not have created the world.”28 He carries on the work of Adam, Seth, and Noah at the altar, uniting heaven and earth in the ordinances and covenants between God and man.29 With Michael and Abel he inaugurated and still supervises the work for the dead with special permission, so now the righteous go to “Abraham’s bosom” (Luke 16:22). God gave Abraham the law—the ordinances and covenants—and declared to him the complete plan of salvation.30 Indeed, we are told that Abraham was associated with God in the creation of the world.31 We are even told that the marks on the garment which Joseph brought to Jacob showed it to be the original garment of Abraham which he received from Adam.32 He and Sarah were the greatest of missionaries, preaching wherever they went, their converts receiving the signs and tokens of the covenant and becoming the true seed of Abraham. This made him “the father of many nations” (Abraham 1:2) in whom “all the nations of the earth shall be blessed” (Genesis 18:18).

In ancient times the world was covered with temples. What was done in them? Surprisingly, all followed the same general pattern. Over sixty years ago I wrote a paper on the subject, comparing a score of temple rites at the great ceremonial centers throughout the world from the remotest times to the present.33 They were astonishingly alike; many scholars had to check over the lists of their common traits again and again to realize that we may be dealing with one single worldwide institution. Thus Samuel Hooke listed five main elements that “constitute the underlying skeleton . . . not only of such seasonal rituals as the great New Year Festivals, but also of coronation rituals, [and] initiation ceremonies.”34 “In extremely diverse cultural contexts we always find the same cosmological pattern and the same ritual scenario,” writes Eliade, and as “man progressively occupies increasingly vast areas of the planet, . . . all he seems to do is to repeat indefinitely the same archetypal gesture.”35 He pointedly observes that “man would not know these tales if they were not revealed to him. Consequently, a myth is the story of what happened . . . at the beginning of time.”36

Carl Jung accounted for these resemblances by what he called the primal images, though he confesses that he hasn’t the vaguest idea how they began and that we don’t even know where to begin to research the subject.37 On the other hand, Lord Raglan and the diffusionists38 say it all went forth from a single planting on the earth by aliens from somewhere.

The Temple Drama

The ancient state or nation was hierocentric, focused on one sacred place of power and authority; such places were sometimes referred to as “places of emergence,” that is, of contact between the Upper and the Lower Worlds, where at the New Year all the people met to rehearse the creation. Regarding this practice, Mircea Eliade writes, “It was the . . . sacred place, . . . the celestial prototype, . . . the act of creation which . . . brought the ordered cosmos out of chaos, . . . the sacred marriage, . . . the ritual confrontation with evil as the dragon and the victory of the King, whose triumphant coronation inaugurates the new age of the world and the cosmos.” There is an “atoning sacrifice” to “restore the primal unity between God and man and enable the latter to regain the Divine presence.” In this, “Reality is conferred through participation in the ‘symbolism of the Center’: cities, temples, houses become real by the fact of being assimilated to the ‘center of the world.’ . . . The temple in particular—preeminently the sacred place—had a celestial prototype,”39 the holy mountain, “the mountain of the Lord’s house” (Isaiah 2:2).

Donald Redford begins the most recent comprehensive history of Egypt by noting that that nation first “bounced overnight, as it were, out of the Stone Age and into urban culture” and also that for “this quantum leap . . . no satisfying answer has been given.”40 Yet he unconsciously provides the explanation when he tells us about the great popular assembly going back in Egypt to prehistoric times: “All the community, high and low, the ancestral ‘souls’ and town gods and local numina, all convened to lend their approbation to the incarnate god-king.”41 There is no need to ask why they went to all that trouble, for they realized that the only hope of continuing life indefinitely was to be born again from time to time, following the example of the sun, which, of course, represented the king, himself having to overcome the powers of darkness in a ritual contest, celebrate a brilliant new coronation and marriage, and get on with the usual affairs.

Since World War II, Egyptologists have displayed a sudden and lively interest in that vast Egyptian funerary literature which the older generation of scholars despised and deplored, and they have come to the agreement that the abiding goal of the people was nothing less than resurrection and eternal life. It was that which made Egyptian civilization what it was. And in a hundred other places in the world people went through the same routine at the same time. Every year in a hundred ancient capitals the creation was dramatized with joyful celebration at the prospect of a new life; singing, dancing, feasting, and drinking were the order of the day, as the angel chorus sings at the beginning of Goethe’s Faust: Everything was herrlich wie am ersten Tag, as glorious as on the day of creation.42

But does all this singing, dancing, dramatizing, and preaching really make it happen? The performance at the temple was a preparation, a training, a school, and a theater, teaching by precept and example. They knew it was not the real thing. Shakespeare apologizes repeatedly in his great superspectacular Henry V, begging the pardon of the audience, “Can this cockpit hold/The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram/Within this wooden O the very casques / That did affright the air at Agincourt?/O, pardon!”43 He excuses himself for the sheer gall of daring to stage a great battle with “four or five most vile and ragged foils/(Right ill dispos’d, in brawl ridiculous).” Still, he is performing a service as he concludes, “Yet sit and see,/Minding true things by what their mock’ries be.”44 The whole thing is just a mockup, as a stage is, a make-believe, frankly, a mockery. But still it will give you an idea of the “true things” it is supposed to represent.

So it is with the temple. Anyone who has ever taken a guided tour through an LDS temple before its dedication or seen the extensive guide to temples published by the Improvement Era45 may recognize the situation. Outside, the temple is boxed to the compass, oriented to the whole universe; we are often told today that the ancient temple was nothing but a scale model of the universe, a place where we take our bearings in eternity. But what about the Provo Temple? While it was being built, I was shocked to notice that it was not so oriented. I was upset, since Brigham Young laid such stress on that arrangement, and I wrote to the Brethren about it. Then it occurred to me that Brigham Young also reminded the Saints that they should not be scandalized if one temple had two towers and another only one.46 In Provo, the architect, while displaying the building itself as an arresting spectacle seen from the valley, took advantage of the phenomenal view of the lake and the valley from the temple—strictly following the directions of the compass would have spoiled all that (see fig. 11). I readily accepted the margin allowed by taste and practicality. While temples are still in the planning stage to suit various climes and settings throughout the world, we need not be alarmed at sundry shifts and alterations. For this is not the final real temple, the ideal future temple of the Temple Scroll. This is a training center, a school for precepts and a showplace for examples (see D&C 109). Here we do not receive crowns of glory but only the promise that if we are true and faithful the day will come when we shall be eligible for such.

To resume the temple tour, the first room is the creation room, where we are introduced to the reality with which we have only recently become accustomed—a world waiting to be born, “empty and desolate, because they had not formed anything but the earth” (Abraham 4:2). And then cloud-covered darkness, from which we escape into the infinite expanse of the starry heavens to learn that this earth is made of the same materials and on the same pattern and following the same physical laws as other worlds that have already been formed. This teaches us a basic principle of Mormonism, that we are living in the physical universe. Though medieval and modern theologians vigorously condemn “cosmism”—that is, the inclusion of the visible universe in the plan of eternal life47—there is, to quote the Egyptologist Gerardus van der Leeuw, “a human inclination (in general as well as in Christianity) . . . to base trust on one’s salvation in the cosmos. . . . [O]nly when the human passion of a divine Savior has a cosmic background does salvation seem sufficiently assured.”48 Hence, Arthur Lovejoy can conclude that in religious writings of any period “the language of acosmism . . . is never to be taken too literally.”49 So Origen, first and best informed of all theologians, declares triumphantly, “When finally, by the grace of God, the Saints shall reach the celestial place, then they shall comprehend all the secrets of the stars. God will reveal to them the nature of the universe.”50 This is the teaching of the early brethren of which Origen is an authority, but his own Alexandrian training breaks through at the end of the passage when he appeals for “perfect knowledge, purged of all that is physical and corporeal.” And since the scriptures tell us nothing about the heavens, he recommends consulting another Alexandrian, Philo the great allegorizer, on the subject.51

The next room is the Garden of Eden, the scene of the greatest primal drama of them all. Now it becomes even plainer that the whole thing is a stage set; everything has been properly set up and we are ready for the play to begin. Where is the stage? The room itself is the stage; it is an auditorium filled with seats for everybody, but the audience is part of the play. They are all actors, each in the imaginary role of Adam or Eve. Each individual, in fact, who is not visiting the temple for the first time, has taken the name and is playing the part of another person; he speaks for him, thinks for him (it is all by proxy), and that makes us all actors, role-playing. But this is no “insubstantial pageant faded,” which “leave[s] not a rack behind.”52 The Lord left his peace and blessing when he departed after the drama of the last supper. For it was a drama too: He explained to the apostles that they were to think thereafter of the wine and the bread as something far more than wine and bread, and to think of him as if he were present. He was teaching them as Jeremiah taught the people when he went around armed with a lamp like Diogenes, staging a like “mystery,” for the Bible calls it a mystery. The “mysteries of the kingdom of heaven” are things understood only by those who have been initiated and taught (Matthew 13:11). One of the oldest Egyptian ritual plays, the so-called Ramesseum Drama (see fig. 12), is careful to explain to the audience that each of the properties represents something else—the carnelian stones are blood, the green stones are bread, etc.

Why do we call the temple a school? The initiatory ordinances make that clear. We begin there with the first requirement, that our brain and intellect be clear and active— we are there to learn and to understand. Bring your brain with you and prepare to stay awake, to be alert and pay attention; also come often for frequent reviews repeating the lessons to refresh our memory, for you cannot leave without an examination—you have to show you have learned some things.

A famous saying of Aesculapius is that “All Egypt is a temple.” Indeed, everywhere you look in Egypt, you are faced with teaching devices boldly displayed on the outside as well as the inside of the many sacred edifices. That is why even the most hard-headed Egyptologist of the Old School felt he was being haunted, “bugged” by somebody trying to tell him that wherever he went in Egypt, the place had a sense of uneasiness and “ennui”—one seems to be living in two worlds at once. The temple, like the medieval cathedral, presents us on every hand with symbols to remind and instruct the worshipper.

A. B. C. D.

(B) perform. Line 75 describes the red carnelian stones.

Leaving the garden room, we go into the dismal world in which we are now living to take care of certain matters that have to be expedited in this world. Then we pass on to a better world. Thus we progress by going higher and higher for each new chamber. It was exactly so in the Egyptian temples. The final ascent takes us to the place of transition, where we take the step into the next world. In the wonderful temple at Denderah, the devotee makes his departure from the roof into the world above. The recently discovered Temple Scroll calls the large assembly room at the top of the temple at Jerusalem (the model temple of the future) the room of the golden veil because the veil was hung from one side to the other. One reaches it in Manti by a spiral ascent, a freestanding stairway that defies gravity, supported only by its own weight—the neat expression of an idea.

Today the various steps of creation are made vivid to us by superb cinematographic and sound recordings, showing the astral, geological, and biological wonders described by the actors and the vast reaches of time that the gods called days before time was measured unto man. Along with that, we are regaled by haunting background music that touches the feelings without intruding on the attention of the audience. Yes, the temple is a theater, and no one directs it so well as Abraham. He gives us the creation story and the plan of salvation in a privileged personal showing. He did not have the visual and sound effects that we do, but he had the common resources of all the ancients—the song, dance, and recitation. It was long debated among Egyptologists whether the Pyramid Texts were recited by a priest or acted out, following instructions held in the hand or written on the walls.

The Sacred Dance

The Greeks called the great yearly celebration the panegyris, meaning everyone gathered. Singing and dancing are the natural modes of expression among archaic peoples throughout the world, and the ring dance is universal.

Philo, in his work on the creation, says the true initiate during the rites moves “in the circuit of heaven, and is borne around in a circle with the dance of the planets and stars in accordance with the laws of perfect music”53—the music of the spheres. Lehi in vision “thought he saw God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with numberless concourses of angels in the attitude of singing and praising their God” (1 Nephi 1:8). From that meeting he saw twelve appointed agents descending to earth (“their brightness did exceed that of the stars in the firmament,” 1 Nephi 1:10), transferring the glories of heaven to earth with the preaching of the gospel.

Lucian, a clever Syrian who wrote in Greek and spoke for the whole Near East, reports that “You cannot have a single ancient teleten (high religious celebration, a mystery) without an orchesis or pantomime dance.”54 Plato says dancing is mandatory at every public offering,55 and Athenaeus says no respectable dinner party could be without song and dance.56 The Old Testament is rich in dancing situations. Israel came out of Egypt dancing, and the victory dances that followed were by choruses of maidens (see Exodus 15:20; 1 Samuel 18:6). We read of a company of prophets carrying instruments (see Psalm 149:3); they danced as they prophesied. There was a daily procession, with song and dance around the altar in the temple; David and Solomon both participated in it. In the dance of the water drawers, “Pious men and men of affairs danced with torches in their hands, singing songs of joy and praise, with a full orchestra of Levites.”57 Rabbi Simeon ben Gamal juggled eight torches in the dance. The Song of Solomon was an antiphonal between two choirs of maidens. Rival maiden choruses got David into big trouble when one sang “Saul hath slain his thousands,” while the others topped with “But David his ten thousands” (1 Samuel 18:6–7). Just such competitions took place in Greece, preserved in the “Maiden Songs” of Alcman.

So we should not be shocked when we find Abraham composing a ballet on the creation. The Greek name for it was chorus. Aeschylus, the first and greatest writer of sacred plays, choreographed his own dramas. In fact, the chorus was the play; it was the chorus that was awarded the prize; the author’s first step in celebrating the sacred rites was to “ask for a chorus.” Plato says in the Laws that “The chorus was nothing more nor less than the educating (paideia) of the people.”58 It was the chorus that sang and danced the creation song. We all know the challenge to Job when he was moping and wailing: “Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? . . . When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?” (Job 38:4, 7; see fig. 13). We consistently ignore the words: “Answer thou me” (Job 38:3) and “declare if thou knowest it all” (Job 38:18). Job was there, and the Lord is reminding him that his sufferings and the defects of this world are for a purpose. In the War Scroll of the Dead Sea Scrolls, the same speech is addressed to the army of Israel when they are downcast after a defeat, saying in effect, “Remember how glad we were to come down here? Bad times were to be part of the picture.”59

I have shown elsewhere that the round dance of the creation drama takes the form of the prayer circle in the temple.60 The Testament of Job brings it vividly to mind. Job himself is not committed to any tribe or nation; like Abraham he was just one of the “men of the East.” Job’s story is indeterminate in time and place but is still full of ancient reminiscences and familiar undertones. The valuable apocryphal Testament of Job, discovered at the beginning of the century, lays special emphasis on temple ordinances. It has long been generally accepted that the Book of Job is authentic theater. The texts go back to the fifth century.61

In the opening lines of his Testament, Job tells his three virgin daughters and seven sons (see Job 1:2) to form a circle around him (the second son’s name is Choros): “Make a circle around me, and I will demonstrate to you the things which the Lord expounded to me, for I am your father Job who is faithful in all things.” 62 Job next tells the circle how the Lord, after healing him of his awful ailments, said, “Arise, gird up thy loins like a man!”63 “And the Lord spoke to me in power, showing me things past and future.”64 He tells his daughters that they will have nothing to fear in this life from the adversary (see fig. 14) because the garments they wear are “a power and a protection from the Lord.”65 Then he tells them to arise and gird themselves to prepare for heavenly visitors.66 “Thus it was that when one of the three daughters . . . arose and clothed herself . . . she began to utter words of wisdom in the angelic language, and sent a hymn up to God, using the manner of praising of the angels. And as she recited the hymns, she let the Spirit make marks [charagmata, cuts or rents] on her garment.”67

The next daughter girded herself likewise and recited “The Hymn of the Creation of the Heavens,” speaking “in the dialect of the archons [cf. the council in heaven].”68 The third daughter “chanted verses in the dialect of those on high . . . and she spoke in the tongue of the cherubim,” her words being preserved as “the prayers of Amaltheias-Keras.”69 Amaltheias-Keras as Amitla was the mother of the infant Abraham when she concealed him from the murderous Nimrod and fed him from her milk in a cave: she was also the horned Amaltheia, the she-goat whose milk fed the infant Zeus when his mother was hiding him in the Dictaean Cave from the bloodthirsty Saturn, even as the infant Horus was concealed in the marshes of Chemmis from Seth by his mother Isis. What can all this be leading to, all these strange parallels? This is the most striking aspect of the histories of Abraham, among the longest biographies in the Bible (see Genesis 11–25). It would seem that parallel instances cling to

Abraham as to few other figures, including his rivals Nimrod and Alexander the Great.

After this artistic treat—and no one will deny that the temple makes no apologies for appealing to our gentler senses and our delight in the Good, the True, and the Beautiful—we now turn to another medium. Just as it is impossible to present the vast panorama of the creation in its enormous stretches of time without the aid of Steven Spielberg and our modern techniques, we find ourselves obliged to fall back on the age-old procedures of voices offstage, describing the scene and the situation by solo voices or various combinations. We still do this in the temple teachings. In the Book of Abraham we also have both the descriptive recitation and the spectacular choral dance themes.

The Terrible Questions

Of the former, the factual recitation, Abraham gives us the most marvelous text of all, the miraculous third chapter of the book that answers with astonishing economy the most fundamental and baffling questions of our existence. Various individuals have struggled with those questions. For example, I like to recall the case of Clement of Rome, the precocious boy in the first century who tells us the story of how in his school days he started asking himself the baffling questions of existence, which almost drove him out of his mind. The young Clement’s main problem was to find someone who could answer his questions—he tried every famous teacher in Rome and found no satisfaction; a friend advised him to go to Egypt, the only place where they had answers to such questions. Instead of going to Egypt, Clement had a chance meeting with the missionary Barnabas who sent him to Caesarea, where he met Peter at a general conference. At last his questions were answered.70

And here is an interesting coincidence: I know of two other boys who had exactly the same problems with exactly the same questions and received exactly the same answers. They were Abraham and Joseph Smith. We do not need to attribute their inspiration to the schools of Alexandria or Athens. So the Prophet Joseph recalled:

At about the age of twelve years my mind became seriously imprest with regard to the all importent concerns for the wellfare of my immortal Soul. . . . [T]hus from the age of twelve years to fifteen I pondered many things in my heart concerning the sittuation of the world of mankind the contentions and divi[si]ons the wickedness and abominations and the darkness which pervaded the minds of mankind my mind become excedingly distressed . . . for I looked upon the sun the glorious luminary of the earth and also the moon rolling in their magesty through the heavens and also the stars shining in their courses and the earth also upon which I stood and the beast of the field and the fowls of heaven and the fish of the waters and also man walking forth upon the face of the earth in magesty and in the strength of beauty . . . even in the likeness of him who created them and when I considered upon these things my heart exclaimed . . . all these bear testimony and bespeak an omnipotent and omnipreasant power a being who makith Laws and decreeeth and bindeth all things in their bounds who filleth Eternity who was and is and will be from all Eternity to Eternity and when I considered all these things . . . I cried unto the Lord for mercy for there was none else to whom I could go.71

And how about Abraham? An important part of his biography, mentioned in all the principal sources, is his precocity as a boy. It began with his asking the usual questions, the same elementary questions that Clement and Joseph asked at the same age and, like the other two, Abraham was answered only by the highest source: Clement by Peter, Joseph by the Lord himself, and Abraham likewise: “Thy servant has sought thee earnestly; now I have found thee” (Abraham 2:12). That was when the Lord appeared to him in the nighttime as he was studying the stars, giving him lessons on the nature and structure of the universe, which Abraham has handed on to us in convenient notation of Facsimile 2.

The knowledge is handed on to us in chapter 3 of the Book of Abraham, a statement of principles and doctrines that answer the ultimate mysteries of our existence. I consider this a miraculous chapter because of its brevity and the astonishing expanse of knowledge it covers. Here are some of the “Terrible Questions” and their answers:

1. The inevitable Where do I come from? The spirits “have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end . . . for they are gnolaum, or eternal” (Abraham 3:18). “And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them. . . . Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born” (Abraham 3:23). It is strange that the doctrine of premortal existence should be so hard for the world to accept. The Sefer Yetzirah, the oldest Hebrew book, usually attributed by the rabbis to Abraham, ends with a resounding declaration of his greatness in the premortal existence. If it is possible for us to be here now, it is just as possible for us to have been there then. Neither proposition, as Roger Penrose has shown, can be proved by algorithm or allegory, yet we have to accept their reality.72

2. Why am I here? “We will make an earth whereon these may dwell; And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them; And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; . . . and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever” (Abraham 3:24, 26). One of the oldest Egyptian creation dramas, portrayed on the Shabako Stone, says that when the earth was adorned and ready to receive its inhabitants, a law was given by which every action of every creature would be judged: “To him who does what is agreeable (lovable, mrr.wt) shall be given a life of eternal rest or happiness (ʾnḫ n ẖr-ḥtp, rest, peace, happiness), while to him who does what is hateful (detestable, msḏá¹) shall be given death and condemnation (disfavor, mt n ẖr-ḫbn.t).”73 Note that it is not necessary to categorize what is good and bad: everyone knows it; it is the Golden Rule. There is no need for centuries of probabilistic head-splitting to define and assign precise numerical values to degrees of good and evil.

3. How did it all begin? It is the Egyptian sia (s-ȝ), “intelligence,” awareness, that comes first. But it is lost without hu (ḥw), “authoritative utterance,”74 “communication” (see fig. 15). As the Lord made clear to Moses, “there is no end to my works, neither to my words” (Moses 1:38). The one is incomplete without the other, and this is made very clear in the oldest Egyptian creation drama, where God “conceives in his mind” and then “utters with his mouth,” communicating his intention to the council of the gods at each step of the creation. This is the very modern doctrine of anthropism. Without s-ȝ—intelligence, awareness—what would exist? And if it were confined to one mind only, what would be accomplished? The Creator must communicate that others may share his “most glorious and beautiful” works of creation, to bring about “the immortality and eternal life of man.”

4. How does the real universe figure in the gospel? Ever since Alexandria all the clergy have condemned “cosmism.” But Abraham puts us into the real universe forever: “He said unto me: My son, my son. . . . And he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made . . . and I could not see the end thereof” (Abraham 3:12). It was all real and visible; this is the latest definition of universe—everything.

5. The question of the Big Bang: How did it all begin and how will it all end? Intelligent beings “existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal” (Abraham 3:18). It is the Hebrew ʾēn sôf (“without end”) principle of the rabbis and Roger Penrose75—an idea beyond definition but not beyond our conception.

This brings up a theological question to which only the Book of Abraham offers a clear solution, namely the problem of hierarchy. This was the secret of Egypt’s strength and stability, a strict hierarchical order of everything, which everyone respected. If it was hard for Satan to subject himself to any other being, it is still hard for the individual human to recognize his inferiority to another. Again and again we are reminded of the strangely obvious principle that one thing can be above another. According to Miriam Lichtheim, who supplies us with over seven hundred gems of Egyptian wisdom, every man’s ego is constantly threatened by other egos, and none is secure—the weakest can damage the strongest.76 Again and again Abraham takes the trouble to remind us of what should be obvious: “Now, Abraham, these two facts exist, behold thine eyes see it. . . . And where these two facts exist, there shall be another fact above them” (Abraham 3:6, 8). “If two things exist, and there be one above another, there shall be greater things above them” (Abraham 3:16). Why is he so insistent on anything so obvious? And so society throughout history has been locked in a paralyzing round of Thorstein Veblen’s “invidious comparison.” We have to live with it; why can’t we admit it cheerfully? I have children who can run circles around me brainwise—should that depress me?

In our competitive society every ego aspires to assert itself, and it does that by comparison. Thus the deadly Christological controversy in which the Athanasians accused the Arians of belittling the Son of God by making him inferior to the Father, while the Arians accused the Athanasians of insulting God by making the Son equal to him. Does the Son envy the Father, or is the Father jealous of him? Christians were willing to shed blood over the issue. Joseph Smith gives us four follies that must be avoided at any cost. One should never, he says, (1) aspire, for that is what Satan did to bring about his fall; (2) accuse—Satan is the devil, and diabolos means “accuser of his brethren”; never mind that the brethren are as guilty as he is; (3) contend—the first rule the Lord gave to the Nephites was, “For verily, verily I say unto you, he that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another” (3 Nephi 11:29); and (4) coerce, or use force to persuade.

Abraham removes the mean, invidious element and makes the order of things accessible to all: “If there be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other, yet these two spirits, notwithstanding one is more intelligent than the other, have no beginning; they existed before, . . . they shall exist after. . . . And the Lord said unto me: These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all” (Abraham 3:18–19). One cannot plead that he is a latecomer, that others came early and got the jump on him: “Ye were also in the beginning with the Father; that which is Spirit, even the Spirit of truth” (D&C 93:23). Opportunity is not a matter of early arrival, for “Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be” (D&C 93:29). This nullifies the whining excuse of Omar Khayyám that God created us that way, and there is nothing that we can do about it: “He who did man of baser metal make.”77 Who is responsible then? It is all in my own hands. Intelligence was not created—it unfolds; no matter how backward I may be I can rejoice in my ignorance, knowing that wonderful things are awaiting my discovery. When I am honest—that is, intelligent enough to search out and dwell upon the things I do not know or in which I have been mistaken, rather than preening myself on the little I do know—surveying such latent discoveries is like a child waiting to open packages on Christmas morning.

6. What is man’s position relative to the universe? Five times in our remarkable third chapter we are reminded that everything that he sees is to be understood only as viewed from the place “upon which thou standest” (Abraham 3:5, 6, 7, 9; see Abraham 3:4). Like Einstein’s man on the boat who thinks that the dock is moving away from him, so Abraham must remember his real position relative to the universe. In all that the Lord showed him, Abraham has still only a limited view. When Moses asked to see more than the scope and range of mission assigned him, he was sharply rebuked: “Worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose” (Moses 1:33). “But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you” (Moses 1:35). In the next verse Moses apologizes: “Be merciful unto thy servant, O God, and tell me concerning this earth . . . and then thy servant will be content” (Moses 1:36).

Our temple drama began like the book of Job, the Gospel of John, and Goethe’s Faust, with the prologue in heaven. In the temple today the prologue is spoken offstage, that is, in another world far removed from our present one. We hear the council in heaven discussing the plan to organize a world like other worlds that have been formed. They will “take of these materials, and . . . will make an earth whereon these may dwell” (Abraham 3:24). The definite pronoun these plainly points to or indicates something, showing that the drama is in progress. Then they appoint two others from among those who stood “among those that were spirits” (Abraham 3:23). Again the definite pronoun that calls our attention to parties who are not mentioned but are obviously indicated by gesture—these are stage directions.

Things being thus decided, the Lord said “Whom should I send?” Here we should note that thirty-three of the forty-two verses in Moses 1 begin with the word and. This in our narrative is the so-called wåw-conversive in Hebrew, which converts the past to a future tense, giving it the sense of stage direction: “The Lord shall say.” To his question, “one answered [or one shall answer] like unto the Son of Man,” obviously stepping forward: “Here I am, send me” (Abraham 3:27). The action is clearly indicated, but why “one like unto the Son of Man”? Why not simply the Son of Man? Because plainly this is not the real character but an impersonation of him, one taking his part: “like the Son of Man.”

“And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first. And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him” (Abraham 3:27–28). Here we have a drama that was played out at the New Year in the temples of Egypt. Dozens of texts still exist, recounting the rivalry of the two leaders, sometimes taking the form of a litigation before the court of the council in heaven, sometimes the form of a knock-down-and-drag-out duel. But it always ends with the expulsion of the aspiring party. (These dramas include that on the Shabako Stone, the Ramesseum Drama, the Celestial Cow, the Contendings of Horus and Seth, etc.) At this point the chorus divides into two, the usual half-choruses that engage in an antiphonal contest. The losers follow the leader off the stage. End of first act.

The Second Act

We now get to the ballets. They start with all useful vegetation, the first step in making the earth—formed, divided, and beautified—habitable for man. The Gods said: “Let us prepare the earth to bring forth grass; the herb yielding seed; the fruit tree yielding fruit, after his kind . . . and it was so, even as they ordered” (Abraham 4:11). This script was made to order for a ballet. The oldest dances in the world have to do with planting and harvesting (in Egypt the haker dance); their significance as fertility rites was the subject of much study in the 1920s and 1930s. This episode of the plants ends a period: from “morning until the evening they called day; and it was the third time” (Abraham 4:13). End of ballet.

Now a quite different dance. “And the Gods organized the lights in the expanse of the heaven” (Abraham 4:14). We have already mentioned the torch dances in Israel, and many of us fondly recall the lively fire dances at the LDS Polynesian Cultural Center. The key word is “organized.” That means everything arranged from subatomic particles to molecules, to organizing the family, an army, a church, or a galaxy. Here we see the mazy motion of the dancers’ chorus and semichorus, as they divide the day from the night and organize themselves into groups to take position, “To be for signs and for seasons, and for days and for years” (Abraham 4:14). Again it says not “to be signs,” but to be for signs, and for days, and for seasons and for years; they are taking their places for the benefit of man. “And the Gods organized the two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night; with the lesser light they set the stars also; And the Gods set them in the expanse of the heavens, to give light upon the earth, and to rule over the day and over the night, and to cause to divide the light from the darkness” (Abraham 4:16–17). Is all that repetition necessary? This is not a laborious tale for the simpleminded, but the unfolding of a splendid pageant, the Dance of Life, the ever-popular torch dance. Not long ago we used to laugh our heads off at the idea that God created the stars and their motions for the benefit of puny man. Today the shoe is on the other foot. Now we are asked to believe how the unimaginable raging forces of the universe, completely uncontrolled and undirected, should zero in on this little planet with nothing but the most benevolent results, adjusting a score of fine-tuned constants to each other with unerring accuracy in defiance of entropy. Not long ago it was believed that such a coincidence was so rare that it could have happened only once in the universe—that is, that this could be the only possible habitable world. But today it seems that the main concern of astronomers is life on other worlds. Carl Sagan resented the suggestion of any mind equal to his own elsewhere in the universe, and yet he designed a missive to be sent into outer space with a message directed to whom it may concern.78

It was all for an appreciative audience, for “the Gods watched [these] things which they had ordered until they [were] obeyed” (Abraham 4:18). The thing was done properly, and then the lights go down: “It was from evening until morning that it was night; and . . . from morning until evening that it was day; and it was the fourth time” (Abraham 4:19).

Next the Dance of the Waters, always a favorite. In the oldest Greek play the chorus is made up of water maidens, the Oceanids; they sail above the stage weeping for poor Prometheus and shedding their tears over the Caucasus.79 The episode is reflected in the Enoch drama of the Pearl of Great Price, where the hero asks, “How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as rain upon the mountains?” (Moses 7:28). It is an equally poetic and dramatic passage from the same antediluvian milieu—for both tales are an immediate preparation for the flood. There is a stunning bas-relief from the Theban tomb of Kheruef depicting the water maidens imitating the waves of the Nile, though quite unaware of the parallel with the Rhine Daughters.

This prepares us for the waters to “bring forth great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters were to bring forth abundantly after their kind; and every winged fowl after their kind” (Abraham 4:21). The impression is that all life began in the waters and that there was an element of the experimental in the undertaking, with the Creators watching the developments until they “saw that they would be obeyed, and that their plan was good” (Abraham 4:21).

Next comes the great animal show. Everyone’s favorite. It is the circus-parade, of course, splendidly displayed on the walls of Paleolithic caves of Lascaux, etc.; it meets us on the prehistoric standards and palettes of Egypt and Mesopotamia from the First Dynasty right through the cosmic chorus of Aristophanes, the bestiaries and mummings of the Middle Ages, and the fancy-dress Fasching celebrations along the Rhine. It takes us back to the earliest drama of Adam and the animals. He lives with them on intimate terms. He must have because he called them all by name, and they were all around him in overwhelming force. He was living in another world then, and we don’t know how long it lasted since “as yet the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning” (Abraham 5:13). This was before he entered with Eve into the garden and the covenant of marriage. It was the earth’s turn to bring forth new types of “beasts after their kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after its kind; and the Gods saw they would obey” (Abraham 4:25). Again the moment of testing; it is as if new ideas were being tried out in the new world.

Before the wonderful photographic images of today, the creation drama was conveyed by dialogue offstage. After Satan’s dismissal, “the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning . . . and formed the heavens and the earth. And the earth, after it was formed, was empty and desolate, because they had not formed anything but earth; and darkness reigned upon the face of the deep” (Abraham 4:1–2). These are the two pictures we get of lifeless worlds, painted on the walls of the creation room: “the earth . . . empty and desolate, because they had not formed anything but the earth.” This we see in Mercury and Venus. This corresponds to dense cloud coverings on other planets, soon to explode into torrential rains. Both conditions are clearly displayed in our older creation rooms. Then “darkness reigned upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters” (Abraham 4:2). “Brooding” implies a long time of preparation for life as we know it. In the fifth chapter we learn that no plants were growing on the earth because it had not yet rained (see Abraham 5:5). Up to this point we are still in the council and planning stage. This raises an interesting question which at present is the object of debate among quantum-mechanics scientists—namely, which world is the real world? According to one school of thought, we cannot say a thing exists until we are aware of it. Recently the eminent French Egyptologist Philippe Derchain has noted that the Egyptians were convinced that if they ever stopped thinking about the universe it would cease to exist.80 This is the Copenhagen doctrine, also called “the anthropic principle,” that light does not exist until we see it.81

The Significance of Temples

There are two parts to the temple ceremony, the dramatic and the pragmatic. So far we have only mentioned the first. The play is ended by the appearance of heavenly messengers who now bid farewell to the artifice of the antique theater and engage us in a new type of learning. Everything up to this point has been by way of explaining our position in this world. The dramatic motifs of the temple and its ordinances are found throughout the world from the very earliest times. President Joseph F. Smith pointed this out when he noted that we find everywhere broken remnants of teachings familiar to Latter-day Saints, going back to a time before world apostasy.82 Where does the gospel differ from all the rest? There is no difference at all where their teachings are true. An old maxim of Mormonism states that all religions have some truth that we share with them. The first part of the endowment, the drama, is found throughout the world. Shakespeare sees the point when he says, “All the world’s a stage/And all the men and women merely players.”83 We are all actors in this world, “merely players,” and nothing else. This was also Abraham’s predicament; according to Martin Buber his life was “an ever-new separation for him and his progeny”; his “entire history . . . is a consequence of choices and partings.”84 He no sooner settled down to living in a place than he had to leave (lech lecha). If all the men and women “have their exits and their entrances,/And one man in his time plays many parts, / His acts being seven ages,” and if each part is completely different—the baby, the schoolboy, the lover, the soldier, the magistrate, the senior citizen, and then, “last scene of all, . . . / Is second childishness and mere oblivion,/Sans eyes, sans teeth, sans taste, sans everything”—if all that is so, which is the real you?85 Shakespeare got this from Solon, the wisest of the Greeks, who wrote on the seven ages of man and concluded that “all are miserable upon whom the sun shines down.”86

But now comes the serious business of our temple. The antique temple drama ends in nothing. The stage lights go out and the house lights go up. Now we must be introduced to the rites and principles that will carry us far beyond this world. We are introduced to special messengers, teachers, and guides and told to pay heed to their counsel, which will continue to lead us on the path of life and salvation. Significantly, those instructions are all in the nature of restrictions and limitations to be set on what could be the exercise of unlimited power through unlimited time. Satan wanted power all for himself: “because that Satan . . . sought . . . that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down” (Moses 4:3). And so like the Ten Commandments the promises and covenants of the temple seem strangely negative to the vanity and arrogance of men. The first is obedience, the restraint on the individual’s power. The second is restraint on possession of things; the eternal spirit cannot be attached to them—one must be willing to sacrifice. The third puts restraints on personal behavior, it mandates deportment, self-control to make oneself agreeable to all.

The fourth is restraint on uncontrolled appetites, desires, and passions, for what could be more crippling on the path of eternal progression than those carnal obsessions which completely take over the mind and body? Finally, the fifth covenant is a limitation on the innate selfishness of the other four—everything you have must be set apart to the everlasting benefit of all.

But we cannot leave it here. Everything about the temple calls for conclusion and a decision; we cannot remain in limbo suspended between the two worlds. Whether we catch a glimpse of the inside of the temple as we approach it from without, or of the outside world once we are inside, they are worlds apart. Latter-day Saint temples have always provided a soothing transition to soften the culture shock, the passing from one existence to another. Gardens of almost unearthly beauty offer an easy and credible passage by sharing the essential qualities of both worlds, “most glorious and beautiful.”

But the wonder is that everything about this experience is real. For seventy-two years I have gone to the temple and listened carefully to everything, and at no time could I say, “There is something wrong here; this is not the way it is!” On the contrary, the lesson is brought home with irresistible force that we do not know everything. There is wonder upon wonder awaiting. What the temple teaches is as real as the temple itself.

Notes

^1. See Jan Assmann, Maʿat (Munich: Beck, 1990), 24–25, 42.

^2. Midrash on Psalm 110:1, in The Midrash on Psalms, trans. William G. Braude (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1959), 2:205.

^3. Micha J. bin Gorion, Die Sagen der Juden (Frankfurt am Main: Rütten and Loening, 1914), 2:203.

^4. Midrash Rabbah Genesis 43:7.

^5. Bin Gorion, Die Sagen der Juden, 2:137.

^6. This tradition is discussed by J. Perlès, “Ahron ben Gerson Aboulrabi,” Revue des études juives 21 (1890): 247.

^7. The stories, based on Genesis 18, are told with the sources in bin Gorion, Sagen der Juden, 2:201–3; and Bernhard Beer, Leben Abraham’s nach Auffassung der jüdischen Sage (Leipzig: Leiner, 1859), 37.

^8. Compare André Parrot, Abraham et son temps (Neuchâtel, Switzerland: Delachaux and Niestlé, 1962), 42.

^9. Other issues of Time Magazine covered leaders and revolutionaries, artists and entertainers, builders and Titans, and heroes and icons; see Time Magazine, 13 April 1998, 8 June 1998, 7 December 1998, and 14 June 1999, respectively.

^10. See Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, trans. Henrietta Szold (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909), 1:210–11.

^11. See Geza Vermes, Scripture and Tradition in Judaism (Leiden: Brill, 1973), 78; and Beer, Leben Abraham’s, 3.

^12. See Vermes, Scripture and Tradition in Judaism, 70–71.

^13. See ibid., 70–72; Beer, Leben Abraham’s, 9–14.

^14. See Adolf Erman, The Ancient Egyptians: A Sourcebook of Their Writings, trans. Aylward M. Blackman (New York: Harper and Row, 1966), 72–73. Some scholars think the plot succeeded and the account was delivered by the king’s ghost!

^15. See Midrash Rabbah Genesis 39:7–9.

^16. See Josephus, Antiquities 1.176.

^17. Josef S. Bloch, Israel und die Völker (Berlin: Harz, 1922), 513 (emphasis added).

^18. See Harry Torczyner, “The Riddle in the Bible,” Hebrew Union College Annual 1 (1924): 140.

^19. See Karl R. Popper, “Science: Problems, Aims, Responsibilities,” Federation Proceedings of the American Societies for Experimental Biology 22 (1963): 964, 970.

^20. Ginzberg, Legends of the Jews, 1:285.

^21. See Maimonides, Dalalat 3.45.

^22. See K. Kohler, “The Pre-Talmudic Haggada,” Jewish Quarterly Review 7 (July 1895): 587.

^23. See J. G. Wiess, “The Kavvanoth of Prayer in Early Hasidism,” Journal of Jewish Studies 9/3–4 (1958): 170–71.

^24. See Hugh W. Nibley, “The Sacrifice of Isaac,” in Abraham in Egypt, CWHN 14:328–30.

^25. Pseudo-Jonathan, cited in Beer, Leben Abraham’s, 66.

^26. See Sofia Cavalletti, “Abramo come messia e ‘ricapitolatore’ del suo popolo,” Studi e Materiali 35 (1964): 251–52.

^27. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Setting the Stage: The World of Abraham,” Improvement Era 73 (January 1970): 63.

^28. Bin Gorion, Die Sagen der Juden, 2:203.

^29. See Nibley, “World of Abraham,” 61–62.

^30. See M. H. Segal, “The Religion of Israel before Sinai,” Jewish Quarterly Review 52 (1961–62): 41.

^31. See Midrash Rabbah Genesis 43:7.

^32. See Nibley, “World of Abraham,” 64.

^33. See Hugh W. Nibley, “The Roman Games” (Ph.D. diss., University of California at Berkeley, 1938), introduction; “The Expanding Gospel,” BYU Studies 7/1 (1965): 3–27; reprinted in Temple and Cosmos, CWHN 12 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1992), 177–211; compare

^34. Samuel H. Hooke, ed., Myth and Ritual (London: Oxford University Press, 1933), 8.

^35. Mircea Eliade, “The Prestige of the Cosmogonic Myth,” Diogenes 23 (1958): 9.

^36. Ibid., 1.

^37. Carl Jung, Man and His Symbols (New York: Doubleday, 1979), 21, 73.

^38. See Lord Raglan, The Origins of Religion (London: Watts, 1949), 35–38. Lord Raglan makes several statements about the diffusionist theory on pp. 51, 55, and 58; “The Hierocentric State,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991), 99–147.

^39. Mircea Eliade, Cosmos and History: The Myth of the Eternal Return, trans. Willard R. Trask (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1959) 5, 7.

^40. Donald B. Redford, Egypt, Canaan, and Israel in Ancient Times (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992), 3.

^41. Ibid., 25.

^42. On New Year’s celebrations, see Nibley, “The Hierocentric State,” 99–147.

^43. William Shakespeare, Henry V, act 4, prologue, lines 11–15.

^44. Ibid., lines 50–53 (emphasis added).

^45. See, for example, Temples and the Latter-day Saints, Improvement Era Temple Issue (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1967); see also a section on temples in the Improvement Era 66 (November 1963): 942–84; and Temples of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Ensign, 1988).

^46. See Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 1:133: “[The Salt Lake Temple] will have six towers, to begin with, instead of one. Now do not any of you apostatize because it will have six towers, and Joseph only built one. It is easier for us to build sixteen, than it was for him to build one.”

^47. See Hugh W. Nibley, “The Terrible Questions,” in Temple and Cosmos, CWHN 12:356–78.

^48. Gerardus van der Leeuw, “Zum Mythus und zur Gestalt des Osiris,” Archiv für Orientforschung 3 (1926): 11.

^49. Arthur O. Lovejoy, The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1964), 92–93.

^50. Origen, Liber Secundus 2.11.7, in PG 11:246.

^51. Origen, Contra Celsum 6.21, in PG 11:1321–25.

^52. William Shakespeare, The Tempest, act 4, scene 1, lines 154–55.

^53. Philo, De Opificio Mundi 70.

^54. Lucian, De Saltatione (On the Dance) 15.

^55. Plato, Laws 7.

^56. See Athenaeus, Deipnosophistae 14.627–68.

^57. Babylonian Talmud Sukkah 51a–b.

^58. Plato, Laws 2.672e (emphasis added).

^59. War Scroll, frg. 11, lines 11–16.

^60. See Hugh Nibley, “The Early Christian Prayer Circle,” in Mormonism and Early Christianity, CWHN 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1987), 45–99.

^61. See Robert A. Kraft, ed., The Testament of Job according to the SV Text (Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1974), on the various texts. For the Greek versions, see F. C. Conybeare, “The Testament of Job and the Testaments of the XII Patriarchs,” Jewish Quarterly Review 13 (October 1900): 111–13.

^62. Testament of Job 1:2.

^63. Ibid., 47:5.

^64. Ibid., 47:10.

^65. Ibid., 47:11–12.

^66. See ibid., 47:12.

^67. Ibid., 48:1–4.

^68. Ibid., 49:1–3.

^69. Ibid., 50:1–3.

^70. See Clement of Rome, Recognitions 1.106, in PG 1:1207–10.

^71. An 1831–32 account of the first vision, dictated to Frederick G. Williams, reproduced in BYU Studies 9/3 (1969): 279–82, spelling retained.

^72. See Roger Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Law of Physics (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989).

^73. Shabako Stone col. 57, author’s translation. See also Kurt Sethe, Das “Denkmal Memphitischer Theologie”: Der Schabakostein des Britischen Museums (London: Egypt Exploration Society, 1930), 1:64–65.

^74. Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3rd ed. (1927; reprint, London: Oxford University Press, 1966), 588, 580.

^75. See Penrose, Emperor’s New Mind.

^76. See Miriam Lichtheim, Late Egyptian Wisdom Literature in the International Context (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1983), 16–18.

^77. Compare the translation in The Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám, trans. Edward Fitzgerald (Roslyn, NY: Black, 1942), 38.

^78. This message was a 6x9-inch gold-anodized aluminum plate that was sent to outer space in Pioneer 10; see Carl Sagan, The Cosmic Connection: An Extraterrestrial Perspective (New York: Dell, 1973), 16–20.

^79. See Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound, lines 140–49, 161–71.

^80. See Philippe Derchain, Le Papyrus Salt 825 (British Museum 10051): Rituel pour la conservation de la vie en Égypte (Brussels: Academy Royale, 1965), 10–11, 14, 82.

^81. See Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind, 354, 433–34.

^82. See Journal of Discourses, 15:325–26.

^83. William Shakespeare, As You Like It, act 2, scene 7, lines 139–40 (emphasis added).

^84. Martin Buber, “Abraham the Seer,” Judaism 5/4 (1956): 295, 296.

^85. Shakespeare, As You Like It, act 2, scene 7, lines 141–43, 163–66.

^86. Solon, Elegiacs 13.

33

Temples Everywhere

This address, given on 4 December 1999 at the Joseph Smith Building auditorium, Brigham Young University, was subsequently published in a memorial issue of Insights 25/1 (2005): 10–16.

Those of us who saw the television documentary American Prophet: The Story of Joseph Smith may have noticed an interesting defect in the script—namely, that it was Hamlet with Hamlet left out. It was as if one were to produce the life of Shakespeare with charming views of Stratford-upon-Avon, country school, the poaching story, marriage to Anne Hathaway, showbiz in London, and respectable retirement without bothering to mention that our leading character gave the world the greatest treasury of dramatic art in existence. Or a life of Bach with his niggardly brother-guardian, his early poverty, his odd jobs with local organs and choirs, his acceptance in the courts of the Holy Roman Empire, his nineteen children, and his loving nature without a word about the greatest volume of music ever produced by a mortal.

So it is with Joseph Smith. No one has the slightest inkling of the mass and charge of his legacy to us. I sometimes think how it would be if I had to hand in a term paper, the subject of which was the “Thousand-Year History of a Nation,” in detail, fiction if you will, or anything else, but one semester to do it in. Panic as the day approaches—what on earth can I write? What shall I say? Anything you want to, but it had better be good. The newspapers had been heckling and guffawing, and everybody was waiting for Joe to fall on his face. Surprise, surprise! He brought out the book, five hundred pages of factual information, on time, and invited critics to do their worst. And of course everyone, including ourselves, has avoided the big question: How did he do it? Local mobs chased him down country roads and broke into his house at night. But nobody was able to explain where he got the book.

In the same sense, does anyone alive have the vaguest clue as to what Joseph really gave us in the temple? That was the greatest of all. The Book of Abraham tells us a lot about it, but who reads the Book of Abraham? In a letter dated 26 February 1996, the director of Berlin’s Egyptian Museum, in answer to a Latter-day Saint student, responded, “The interpretations printed in the three Facsimiles have nothing to do with Egyptian beliefs: they are pure fantasy.” In the next sentence, however, the director obligingly refers his correspondent to Professor Erik Hornung, specifically to his book on the Valley of the Kings,1 which he recommends as giving “the real explanations of the Egyptian drawings.” This is welcome advice since Professor Hornung may well be called the supernova of the so-called New School of Egyptology.

Obedient to the good director, we turn at once to Hornung’s guidebook, which refers us to the works of yet another giant: “Egyptian historiography reached its high-water mark with Eduard Meyer.”2 With all haste, we repair to the books of Meyer: “Mormonism is one of the most instructive phenomena in the whole area of religious history: And it is most remarkable . . . that students of religion who have sought enlightenment in the most remote, inaccessible, and all but incomprehensible religions of the past have kept themselves strictly aloof from Mormonism and disdained the rich instruction it has to offer.”3 Having viewed the whole field, Professor Meyer can assure us that it is the case of Joseph Smith that sheds light upon all the others and helps us to reach an understanding of the fundamental problems.4 And here is my point: Though the great Eduard Meyer was impressed enough to come to Utah in 1904 and carry on his investigations here, he never bothered to read the Book of Mormon, declaring that only a Mormon could have the patience to get through it. For him the Pearl of Great Price does not exist; and yet it was his special field—for that very reason he could not lower himself to take it seriously. Joseph Smith’s resurrection of the temple should have electrified him, but in those days it was fashionable for Egyptologists to hold all religion, and especially that of the crazy, irrational Egyptians, in contempt.

It is another picture today. The New School of Egyptology has focused and held its full attention on the religion of Egypt; almost every leading scholar has written a work on the Egyptian concept of the hereafter, which requires deep searching into the temple and funerary literature—recognized as essentially the same. Whoever would have thought it?

The ancient world was filled with temples. Two centuries of worldwide comparative studies has come up with the conclusion that there existed throughout the world from the most ancient times a body of religious beliefs and practices centered around the temple. Everyone recognizes the sameness of the dominant theme and allows for local variations. But it is generally agreed that throughout the world people have held certain general concepts which for some strange reason have been very much the same; the objectives and the rites to achieve them are strangely alike from prehistoric times down to Christianity, virtually unchanged. The temple rites and funeral rites all had the same common intent—namely, to see the worshipper safely through from this world to the next and to guarantee an acceptable eternity hereafter.

To make such a transition the temple is necessary, it being defined as the place of contact (“interface,” says Hornung) between worlds above and below the earth; more recently emphasis has been put on its function as relating to the cosmos. This was the only solution to the one great problem that has ever haunted the human race: the problem of facing death.

Resurrection and eternal life are the sine qua non of that peace of mind which is the whole gift of religion. The neo-Freudians have finally recognized “the rediscovery of modern psychology: that death is man’s peculiar and greatest anxiety,” outranking even sex.5 In his prize-winning book, Ernest Becker finds that “historic religions addressed themselves to this same problem of how to bear the end of life. Religions like Hinduism and Buddhism performed the ingenious trick of pretending not to want to be reborn.”6 Not so our Egyptians. Siegfried Morenz has pointed out the complete contrast between eternity of the Egyptian individual and the Indians’ transmigration, the one determined to be himself forever and the other resigned to becoming anything you please—a drop of water in an ocean of being.7

If modern scholars are depressed by the mortuary atmosphere of Egyptian culture, our modern world has an even more demoralizing message: the absolute scientific certainty that man “goes back into the ground a few feet in order to blindly and dumbly rot and disappear forever,” taking with him his vast unrealized potential.8 No wonder “the full apprehension of man’s condition would drive him insane.”9 Mircea Eliade concludes his book Cosmos and History with a warning that unless we find “a new formula for man’s collaboration with the creation” to give tragedies a meaning, we must be “prey to a continual terror.”10 The temple provides the formula.

Since death cannot be denied, what hope is there for the hereafter? The Egyptian answer, as everybody recognizes today, was to start all over again and have a new life. That meant a new creation. How was that to be effected? There is one glowing example which no one can overlook—the sun. And the Egyptians, like other ancient people, made the most of it. Stick close to the sun was the idea, and do what he does. Get yourself a place in his boat, as a crew member, attendant (šms-Rʿ), or member of the family. To prolong your own life, you must get in on the action—you must be present at the only time and place that the sun, completing one cycle and reaching its lowest point at the solstice, without a split-second hesitation, reverses its direction and begins its upward climb.

This means that everybody in the world had to come together at a special place—the exact center of the cosmos, since it was the point of convergence for the pilgrims’ roads from every point on the horizon. And for the beginning of a new life cycle, you must start with the creation all over again. The creation drama is a standard feature of temple worship. Everywhere, as far as we can trace the records and the ruins, there have been great gatherings of the race—the panegyris, or “everybody in a circle,” in every part of the world. Many have recognized the phenomenon, but no one can explain when or how it began. Eduard Meyer thinks it started with animals in their periodic meetings to disport and reproduce. Megalithic circles marking the great ceremonial assemblages are found by the thousands and go back to the Stone Age.

I had the good fortune to be stationed near Avebury in Hertfordshire at the end of World War II and had ample time to examine the vast establishment. That was before it was discovered by the tourists. The stone circle, 1400 feet in diameter, was rivaled by the great artificial mound “Silbury Hill,” 150 feet high, the highest artificial mound in Europe, to beckon the pilgrim from afar. It took thirty-five million baskets of earth to complete—by a community, it is calculated, of only five hundred souls.11 The mountain dominated the flat surrounding plain, littered with the bones of countless ceremonial feasts. From the air (I had to pass over it slowly in regular and frequent glider flights) one could behold traces of prehistoric roads, marked by standing stones, leading from all directions. That is the general layout of countless megalithic ceremonial centers, over ten thousand of which are known and, according to Aubrey Burl, the principal authority, is “strangely parallel in North America where the collapsed trading networks of the Hopewell Indians in Ohio were succeeded by the Temple Mound societies.”12 According to him, the British “circles were separated from Cahokia by three thousand years and four thousand miles of Atlantic Ocean,” and Cahokia culture goes back to Teotihuacan.13 He could neither explain the anomaly nor deny the astonishing resemblance.

Strangely, I was prepared for this surprise (at that time little attention was paid to Avebury), for eight years earlier in Berkeley I had produced a laborious comparative study, a thesis examining eyewitness accounts of some fifteen such holy centers scattered widely in the Old World. Within a year of returning from the army, I went straight to Provo, where Brother Virgil Bushman, a great missionary to the Hopi and Navajo, urged me to come with him and see the culture of the Old World in Arizona. I have described our arrival in Hotevilla in the piece called “Promised Lands.”

I was stunned by what I saw as we came through a low arch at dawn out onto the spectacle of a splendid drama in progress. Here, on a high, bleak rock, surrounded by nothing but what we would call total desolation in all directions, was a full-scale drama in progress in the grand manner of the Ancients. . . . Everything was being carried out with meticulous care; all the costumes were fresh and new; . . . nothing artificial—all the dyes, woven stuff, and properties taken from nature.

What an immense effort and dedication this represented! And for what? These were the only people in the world that still took the trouble to do what the human race had been doing for many millennia—celebrating the great life-cycle of the year, the creation, the dispensations. I told Brother Bushman that there should be fifty-two dancers, and that is exactly what there were, . . . the sacred number of the Asiatics and the Aztecs, but it was also the set number of dancers in the archaic Greek chorus. [We remember that there were fifty-two rods stored in the ark of the covenant, each sheve† or staff representing a family in Israel.]14

Hotevilla is an exciting new study and wild surmise; I refer you to the recent volume by Thomas Mails and Dan Evehema entitled Hotevilla: Hopi Shrine of the Covenant, Microcosm of the World.15 Through the years I have taken some beautiful reproductions of Egyptian papyri to show to the children and elders in Hotevilla; they have been greatly impressed by the resemblances to their own rituals. The dancers always have the headband and two feathers, stripes on the face, copper bands around the arms, an evergreen wreath around the neck, bandolier over the shoulder, and especially an apron of fox or wolf skin with the tail dangling conspicuously behind, the wand or rattle, the ornament at the knee, and buskins on the feet. And when I have taken professors from Israel to visit the Hopis, they were simply bowled over by the parallels.

The recognition of a prehistoric order of things, religious and political, picked up speed with the founding of the East India Company in 1773; eager young Englishmen discovering the East and the primacy of Sanskrit broke into the open field with “inquiry . . . into all the languages to reduce them to one common center, from which they spread like rays of the Sun.”16 The progress of the science is marked by the writings of the great Max Müller, who moved from philology to his monumental Rig-Veda-Sanhita (1849–1874),17 to a broader Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion (1879),18 and finally to his wide-ranging studies on the science of mythology.19

And so the next step: “If the heathens already possessed . . . an abundant stock of religious myths, then song and story could not fail to . . . interweave themselves with the rites and customs.”20 Throughout the world students started studying the various major events and making lists of their main features. When these lists were compared, they displayed a surprising degree of conformity, especially in the five main events. Eliade strings together the sacred place (the celestial prototype), the act of creation (the sacred marriage), the confrontation with evil, the victory of the king, and the coronation. To these he adds the atoning sacrifice (cleansing the people of their sins) and memories of paradise, festivities wistfully but happily recalling the golden age.21

As we summed up the picture many years ago, “At hundreds of holy shrines, each believed to mark the exact center of the universe and represented as the point at which the four quarters of the earth converged—‘the navel of the earth’—one might have seen assembled at the New Year—the moment of creation, the beginning and ending of time—vast concourses of people, each thought to represent the entire human race in the presence of all its ancestors and gods.”22 The whole trend can be summed up in an astonishing statement of Eliade: “In extremely diverse cultural contexts we always find the same cosmological pattern and the same ritual scenario,” and as “man progressively occupies increasingly vast areas of the planet, . . . all he seems to do is to repeat indefinitely the same archetypal gesture.”23

The great object of Egyptian ritual was “the creation, maintenance, and continuation of life beyond death, in the cosmos as well as on earth. . . . After creation . . . the vital force of all creatures has to be preserved for eternity, this being accomplished by continuous renewal or rejuvenation.”24

It is a case of “periodically recharging the sun,” as Hornung puts it.25 This requires the aid of all living things.26

Mankind must cooperate in “the rites and ordinances that express the unity of the universe [and] must be repeated to keep up [man’s] awareness of them,” without which the whole structure would vanish.27 “Everything meaningful is brought together into a single meaningful whole.”28 It was both with natalia and the resurrection when everyone went wild with the good news that death had been overcome and the hero had risen victorious over death.29

Not the least significant note on the primacy of the temple is the source and origin of civilization. The spin-offs that the great year-rite generated throughout the world were quite inevitable. The bringing together of vast numbers of farmers from widely scattered regions, bringing their local produce to be exchanged for acceptable temple tokens (see 1 Samuel 1:3), required facilities for exchange, “banks” or benches of the money changers in the court of the temple. The exchange of goods and services gave rise to great markets and market centers all over the world. It was the one time and place at which servants could be hired out “for a year and a day.” Contracts had to be made and signed between parties who would not see each other for another year. Legal problems arose, and courts to take care of them, with agents representing the king himself.

For the long dangerous journey, hostels and hospitals had to be provided. The local youth inevitably engaged in demonstrating the village pride and prowess; boxing and wrestling (the Icelandic glíma), songs, dances, dramatic recitations, and plays by traveling troupes still have a ritual significance. At the shrine itself one could receive oracles, healings, dreams, counsel.

Homer has given us the whole picture in his hymn to Apollo. When the gods looked down from their happy halls of Olympus and saw the poor struggling human race, who had been their companions in a golden age, helpless to cope with their condition and, worst of all, without any cure for death or old age, Leto, the ambitious mother of Apollo, saw a chance for undying fame and wealth by having her son go down and establish a circuit of temples, marking the course of the sun through the year, where the people could gather at the New Year all dressed in white, bringing their rich gifts and feasting and dancing and having a wonderful time while celebrating the creation of the world and their ancient companionship with the gods.

Most of all, the temple was the home of the arts and sciences. Vivid portraits of ancestors and sacred images and idols developed a great plastic art. The temple itself was the sacred edifice that required sophisticated geometry according to strict rules and holy dimensions.30 So also did the reapportioning of private and state- and temple-owned fields and forests, resurveyed at the end of each year. The all-important timing of rites and festivals required close observation of the heavens, and the temple as in Egypt was the site of a great observatory. Divination by the study of the liver and other parts of animals and birds, connected with sacrifice, advanced the medical art.

The library was the pride of the temple with the records of the past, including complete genealogies (see Abraham 1:28) and the description of the universe. It was the House of Life where all knowledge was deposited forever. Thoth, the librarian, is addressed as “Lord of the Divine Words, Keeper of the Secret Knowledge . . . who established speech and writing, causing the temples to flourish.”31 He is assisted by the “Lady of Writing,” Seshat (Sšȝt), whose name shows her to be the Secret-ary (the name means “secret woman”) par excellence.32 Of special interest to Latter-day Saints is the great concern with the records and work for the dead. Here is one of many “Instructions for Sealing the Order (request) of a Man Concerning His Family.” Text: “I come before you exalted ones (male and female)! The Great One in concurrence with the Council has approved (ordered) the sealing of a certificate (order) concerning this my family. Thoth has said to me, the order has been sealed, giving you his voice. This order has accordingly been validated (nfr.w). This correct writing for the Lady of Appearances is to the effect that my family is given to me.”33

The lady is Seshat, who from prehistoric times has been in charge of all the records. The next item is also Coffin Text 143: N is Re who comes forth in the Hnhnw-ship, a glorified spirit in passage. This N has taken his seat in the West beside the Great God. He has opened the mouth of the earth . . . the gates of Geb. He has assembled dependents of this N before him, along with his proper family. . . . This N has written down a multitude of persons, male and female. N goes among those upon the shore, and hears those within their shrines (tombs). This N unites the dependents. With the coming of this family of N to him, a multitude has surrounded this N. This N has written down those spirits which still remain hidden in places of the West. They give the ba to N to give glory to this N . . . causing the caves to open to N with those who are in them in the Nun. This N (legal language) releases their bonds that they may walk in the light. . . . This N issues the command for breath and strength which is stronger than the Gates of Hell (ȝkr) to live after death even as Re does every day. If his dependents are not united with him in the Amentit, then he will come down to the lake of the land that devours and flames shall come forth against those who are in the Nun.34

This is designated “for uniting the family of N to him in the other world.” The long Coffin Text 146 is “To Gather the Family in the Next World.” If they are not gathered he shall lose them: “His staff shall be removed from his hand.” This is the language of Israel, for example, the staff, sheveá¹, departing from Jacob. If he fails to gather them in the beyond, there will be no great family reunions on earth with the usual parties and feasting. This is an authentic piece of “recognition literature,” like the Clementine Recognitions and the moving family stories of the classical New Comedy down to present-day productions of the Comedy of Errors. When N arrives in the other world, the family is working in the field.

Now NN’s sister, the woman who is in charge of the great field has said: “See, you have come joyful and happy-hearted!” So said she to NN. “Give answer! Has there been granted to you a valid decree for this family of yours?” NN has gone down happy and rejoicing, for his family has been given to him. The great ones of NN’s family have gone down joyfully, and their hearts are full at meeting NN. They have left their plows (˙>b.w) and their utensils (tools, pots—˙n.w), on the ground. Conclusion: Assembling the family, father, mother, friends, associates, children, women, concubines, servants, workers, anything belonging to a man for him in the realm of the dead.35

As with us, one went to the temple for an “endowment”— that is, to be given all the equipment, information, and certification he would need to make the passage from this world to the next. And to our surprise, this is the main theme of all temple and funeral literature. As Richard Lepsius put it in the first edition of the Book of the Dead, “The text applies only to the deceased and the things he will meet with on the long journey after his earthly death. There is described to him where he is going, what he does, what he hears and sees,” or the prayers and addresses which he must give to whatever gods he meets.36

The surprise is that the best account of the endowment is found in Joseph Smith Papyrus XI, the Book of Breathings. The key to the endowment is the eternal progression of the pilgrim from one state of blessedness to another.

As you approach the camp surrounding the temple, you signify your intent with a reassuring sign, a signum, visible from a distance, calling attention to yourself as Adam does in his prayer and demonstrating your peaceful intent. Upon reaching the gate, you present your token, a tangible object (compare touch, digit, dactyl, or a solid handclasp). All these serve as a tessera hospitalis, admitting one to a closed group or a party, or a club, guild meeting, etc. It is presented to the doorkeeper, a herald trained in such matters: “The Holy One of Israel is the Keeper of the Gate, and he employs no servant there!” Most important, “he cannot be deceived” (2 Nephi 9:41).37 The token recognized, you pronounce your name to the doorkeeper in a low voice, a whisper, for it is a special name agreed on between you and your host and should not be picked up and used by anyone else. There is a famous Egyptian story about how Isis tried to get her true name from Re so that she could give it to her son along with the priesthood. So we have names, signs, and penalties introducing us to the ancient rites of hospitality in the mysteries.38

But to be at the temple one must first get there. Essential to every endowment is the journey or pilgrimage to reach the place. Moreover, once one has arrived the traveling continues, for the passage through the temple from room to room, level to level, and ordinance to ordinance is a true rite of passage.

Throughout the world the candidate begins on his arrival by removing his dusty clothes, and is bathed, anointed, and dressed in white robes and slippers. Then he receives a new name and proceeds from chamber to chamber of the temple. After passing through the veil to depart, he never returns again but proceeds on his way to the next temple for a higher endowment.

What happened to all the temples? The reply to that question is well documented—they were privatized. Free from taxation, but also free to engage in trade as charitable foundations, including accumulating land by grants from the king and nobility along with the serfs to cultivate them, the religious societies became immensely rich, like the Cistercians in the time of Henry VIII. The priesthood of Thebes grabbed everything and finally aspired to take over the rule of the country. And so we have the owners for security converting their shrines to castles.

I spent my mission up and down the Rhine plain in Germany. It was medieval country and Catholic, and I tracted every house in scores of villages and got a pretty good idea of how things worked. All up and down the length of the great river at almost regular intervals were magnificent cathedrals. Cathedral means a seat or preaching stand, the center of power of a bishop. And next to the cathedral was the palace of the prince-bishop himself. The dual role of the takeover is represented by Longfellow’s notoriously wicked “Bishop of Bingen in his Mouse-Tower on the Rhine” (“The Children’s Hour”). It was the new order of the fortified palace that ruled the land. These great structures were under a curse as oppressors of the peasants and doomed to fall. Golden Mycenae, sacred Thebes, Troy itself, Camelot, Hersepolis, the Jomsborg, Aasgard, the House of Usher, San Simeon—all claimed the powers of the temple over subjects. Under the castle was the realm of Pluto, or the caves where the dragons slept guarding the heaps of disastrous Rhine gold, and deeper still the toiling dwarves, the once-free inhabitants of the land slaving to bring forth more gold—the cursed gold of the Nibelungen.

The commercialized temples, “the cloud-capped palaces,” stand out in bold contrast to the true solemn temples of Cologne, Speyer, Bruchsal, Freiburg, Worms—I labored in all of them as a missionary. But how did these sacral centers accomplish their end? It was by a frontal attack, sheer assertion, an overpowering display and demonstration of might and glory from the awesome horns of the Tibetan lamasery to the booming organs of the Byzantine court—an overpoweringly contrived theatrical production of heaven.39

When the emperor entered, Constantine says, and a beam of sunlight hit his garment stiff with jewels, you felt you were in the presence of an angel of God. This mind-boggling theater was taken over by the West and combined the intoxication of the senses with a compelling force of mass action. No one can resist being swept along by such a cheering section. “What society as a whole believes,” wrote St. Augustine, “that we also believe and without an inkling of doubt, even though we admit that we cannot know that it is true.”40

From the sixth century B.C. on, the art of rhetoric became the substance of education. Quintillian defines it as the vis persuadendi, or the art of persuasion; it was also called suaviloqentia, or the “soft sell.” The Greek sophist and rhetorician Gorgias, one of the founders, worked out the technique which enables the student to speak offhand on any subject for any length of time and to sell anything to anybody. The new art caused an immense sensation, not unlike the computer today, and never lost its control over the public. Plato said it made great things small and small things great by the manipulating of words—a vicious device but a very useful one. “People of every class became inflamed with the desire to achieve the new success,” wrote Irvin Rhode. St. Augustine felt it was the ultimate weapon for conversion and made it the cornerstone of Christian education even while he confessed, “I taught the art of rhetoric . . . and, myself the victim of cupidity, trafficked in loquacity.”41

The problem of rhetoric was to make an irresistible impression immediately on large numbers of people. To do that you had to pour it on. Copia, “abundance, excess,” is Cicero’s favorite word. So this became the obsession of the Western church—boundless profusion and endless size. St. Peter’s and Hagia Sophia are meant to be overpowering. When size had to be limited, the Baroque poured it on with massive profusions of glittering gold. Justinian boasted that he had surpassed Solomon’s temple. People were out to gather glory to themselves.

I began this talk with Shakespeare and Bach, and I agree with Spengler that they represent the high point of our civilization. Now I invite you to go home from this melancholy meeting and beguile three hours or so before the tube, so that you may experience one full hour of commercials. This is the final triumph and total corruption of rhetoric—rude, brief, and wrenching interruptions, as garish and distracting as possible, as your attention is jerked from one sales pitch to another, and we sit there and allow this corrupt practice to inflict the deadly epidemic of the past on our civilization. At this point the only escape I can think of is the temple. I testify to its sanctity and power to purify our thoughts and lives.

Notes

^1. Erik Hornung, The Valley of the Kings: Horizon of Eternity, trans. David Warburton (New York: Timken, 1990).

^2. Erik Hornung, Einfuhrung in die Ägyptologie (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1967), 117.

^3. Eduard Meyer, Ursprung und Geschichte der Mormonen (Halle: Niemeyer, 1912), 1.

^4. Ibid., 11–13.

^5. Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death (New York: Free Press, 1973), 70.

^6. Ibid., 12.

^7. Siegfried Morenz, Religion und Geschichte des alten Ägypten (Weimar: Boblaus Nachfolger, 1974), 214–30.

^8. Becker, Denial of Death, 26; cf. 2 Nephi 9:7.

^9. Becker, Denial of Death, 27.

^10. Mircea Eliade, The Myth of the Eternal Return: Or, Cosmos and History, trans. Willard R. Trask (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974), 161, 162.

^11. Aubrey Burl, Prehistory Avebury (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979), 133.

^12. Ibid., 168.

^13. Ibid., 170.

^14. Hugh W. Nibley, “Promised Lands,” in Brother Brigham Challenges the Saints, CWHN 13 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1994), 77.

^15. Thomas E. Mails and Dan Evehema, Hotevilla: Hopi Shrine of the Covenant, Microcosm of the World (New York: Marlowe, 1995).

^16. George W. Dasent, Tales from the Norse (Edinburgh: Douglas, 1888), xxi.

^17. Rig-Veda-Sanhita: The Sacred Hymns of the Brahmans, trans. F. Max Müller (London: Allen, 1849–1874).

^18. F. Max Müller, Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion as Illustrated by the Religions of India (New York: Scribner, 1879).

^19. F. Max Müller, Contributions to the Science of Mythology (London: Longmans, Green, 1897).

^20. Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, trans. James S. Stallybrass (London: Bell and Sons, 1883), 3:vi–vii (emphasis added).

^21. Eliade, Cosmos and History, xvi; and Mircea Eliade, The Forge and the Crucible, trans. Stephen Corrin (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978), 10.

^22. Hugh W. Nibley, “The Hierocentric State,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991), 99.

^23. Mircea Eliade, “The Prestige of the Cosmogonic Myth,” Diogenes 23 (1958): 9.

^24. Wolfhart Westendorf, Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture of Ancient Egypt (New York: Abrams, 1968), 3.

^25. Erik Hornung, Die Nachtfahrt der Sonne: Eine altägyptische Beschreibung des Jenseits (Munich: Artemis and Winkler, 1991), 15.

^26. Ibid., 115; cf. Moses 1:39.

^27. Philippe Derchain, Le Papyrus Salt 825 (B.M. 10051): Rituel pour la conservation de la vie en Égypte, Académie Royale des Sciences des Lettres de Belgique, vol. 2, no. 58, part 1 (Brussels: Palais des académies, 1965), 6.

^28. Alexander Scharff, Ägypten und Vorderasien im Altertum (Munich: Bruckmann, 1950), 51.

^29. Tertullian, Adversus Marcionem, vol. 1 of Testi e documenti per lo studio dell’antichità (Milan: Instituto editoriale cisalpino, 1971), 13; Marcus Minucius Felix, Octavius, Bibliotheca scriptorum Graecorum et Romano-rum Teubneriana (Leipzig: Teubner, 1903), 22:1–2; in Theodor Hopfner, comp., Fontes historiae religionis aegyptiacae (Bonn: Marcus and Weber, 1922), 519–20.

^30. Vitruvius Pollio, De Architectura (Amsterdam: Apud Ludoricum Elzevirum, 1649).

^31. Günther Roeder, Urkunden zur Religion des alten Ägypten (Jena: Diederichs, 1915), 14.

^32. Heinrich Schäfer, “Mousa bei Horapollo 11, 29 und die Göttin Ss3-t,” Zeitschrift für ägyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde 42 (1905): 74–75.

^33. Coffin Text 143, in Adriaan de Buck, The Egyptian Coffin Texts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1938), 2:175–77.

^34. Ibid.

^35. Coffin Text 146, in de Buck, Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2:180–205.

^36. Das Todtenbuch der Ägypter nach dem Hieroglyphischen Papyrus in Turin, trans. Richard Lepsius (Leipzig: Wigand, 1842), 1.

^37. See Hugh W. Nibley, “Sparsiones,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10:148–94.

^38. See Hugh W. Nibley, “The Arrow, the Hunter, and the State,” in The Ancient State, CWHN 10:1–32.

^39. See Constantine, De Ceremoniis Aulae Byzantinae, in PG 112:73–1446.

^40. Augustine, De Utilitate Credendi 12, in PL 42:84.

^41. Augustine, Confessions 4.2.2, in St. Augustine’s Confessions, trans. William Watts (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1968), 1:148–49.

=== END BOOK ===
